--- PAGE 3 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND 
SoNGs oF jv1ilarepa 
Volume I 

--- PAGE 4 ---
The life'story and teaching of the greatest Poet' 
Saint ever to appear in the history of Buddhism. 
SHAMBHALA 
BOULDER & LONDON 
1977 

--- PAGE 5 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND 
SoNcs oF ilarepa 
'fRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED 
BY Qarma C. C. Chang 

--- PAGE 6 ---
SHAMBHALA PUBLICATIONS, INC. 
1123 Spruce Street 
Boulder, Colorado 80302 
© 1962 Oriental Studies Foundation 
Originally published in cloth by 
University Books, New Hyde Park, N.Y. 
First complete paperback edition 
published 1977 by Shambhala Publications, Inc. 
ISBN 0-87773-095-4 
LCC 76-55120 
Distributed in the United States by Random House 
and in Canada by Random House of Canada Ltd. 
Distributed in the Commonwealth by 
Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., London and Henley-on-Thames 
Printed in the United States of America 

--- PAGE 7 ---
To the memory of 
My Gt~.ru 
His Holiness, Lama Kong Ka 
To my wife 
Hsiang-hsiang 
and 
To my Brother-in-the-Dharma 
Peter Gruber 
without whom the publication of this 
book would not have been possible 

--- PAGE 9 ---
FOREWORD 
M
Y FIRST meeting with the translator of this book goes back to 
the year 1947. We met in Darjeeling, a resort town in the foothills of the Himalaya Mountains. He had just come from Tibet, a 
distance which, though not far from Darjeeling, has to be measured 
in the number of days' travel by horses and yaks. Tibet was then a 
great mystery and source of curiosity to most people; the country was 
still closed to foreigners and only a few Europeans had been there. 
The barrier, however, was less stringent on the Chinese side. With 
this advantage, Mr. Chang had left China for Tibet in the late 1930's 
to search for Dharma and Enlightenment. He traveled extensively in 
the Kham region of Tibet and studied Buddhism in various monasteries for more than eight years. His fascinating and inspiring adventures in this "innermost part of Tibet" are a matter for another book. 
Because of his long years of study and practice in Tibet, his personal 
devotion and committment to Buddhism, and his first-hand experience 
of the lives of the Tibetan people, he is best qualified to translate this 
great Tibetan classic, The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa, 
which, up to the present, has not appeared in complete translation 
in any Western language. 
But what contribution has this book to make to a modern man, 
with no time to read, who has already been swamped in a flood of 
books? To answer this question, some relevant facts should first be 
reviewed. 
If the average modern man is asked what he is living for, and what 
is the aim of his striving, he will probably tell you, with some embarrassment, that he lives "to enjoy life," "to support his family," "to 
have fun," "to make money," or "to achieve something meaningful 
and worthwhile." But in reality, we are all aware that no one seems 
to know exactly what he is living for. If he broods over the things 
surrounding him and the kind of world he is living in, he will soon become skeptical about the relevance of raising these questions. He cannot help but ask honestly, "Can we really know the right answers, do 
we have any choice over these matters, and after all, what difference 
will it make?" 
In spite of the unavoidable resignation and bewilderment that the 
modem man feels, sooner or later he finds himself compelled to choose 
between two alternatives: he can either turn to religion with blind 
IX 

--- PAGE 10 ---
X 
FOREWORD 
faith and hope, or turn to the world and "make the best of it." It is 
certain that men choose the former, not always because they are convinced of the truth of religion, but rather because doubt and despair 
have made their lives unbearable. On the other hand, they choose the 
latter, not because they have proved the untruth of religion, but because, in all likelihood, their spirits are deadened by pessimism and 
indifference. One fact, however, remains clear: in both cases the 
choice is made under the coercion of pain, sorrow, or despair. 
It is common knowledge that an awareness of impending peril stirs 
men to act and to strive, that an awakening to man's limitations and 
helplessness in the face of the Universe, inspires him to pursue the "beyond" and the eternal. Thus both heaven and earth, 
Nirviii:~a and 
Sarpsara, owe their births to human sufferings and despair. A thoughtful man must ask: "Is it really advantageous to lead a life without 
any suffering? Are not misfortune and grief prerequisites for spiritual 
awakening? From the ultimate viewpoint, are we, the sophisticated 
'men-of-abundant-knowledge-and-possessions,' truly better off than the 
'men-of-ignorance-and-scarcity' of olden times?" Let us think twice before we give an affirmative answer to these questions. Let us also ponder 
on some further ones: "Is it not true that science and technology, at 
their best, can alleviate but not eliminate the sufferings of men? Can 
plastic surgery, or the 'face-lift,' really make a miserable old woman 
happy? Does it really matter much whether or not we can defer our 
entrance into the grave for ten or fifteen years beyond schedule?" 
Many ingenious devices have been invented to conceal the unpleasant 
facts of life, and many gadgets have been created to gratify men's 
insatiable desires; but in the final analysis, what else have these contrivances brought us save their contributions to a fool's paradise for 
men to live in? Science, as some wise man has said, "makes major 
contributions to minor needs." Religion, whether or not it comes up 
with anything, at least is at work on the things that are truly important. 
Deluded by material achievements and comforts, the majority of 
modem men are deprived of the opportunity and privileges of leading 
a rich spiritual life as their forefathers once did. In just reading a few 
stories of this great Tibetan classic, The Hundred Thousand Songs of 
Milarepa, we can readily find evidence that it was immeasurably easier for the "backward" Tibetans to contact the spiritual verities and to 
lead devotional lives than for their more "advanced" contemporaries. 
The reason for this is apparent: They had much simpler minds and 
they led much simpler lives. Being closer to the sheer facts of life 
uncloaked by camouflage and disguises, they had more opportunity 
to observe its sufferings and transiency; and in closer contact with 
Gurus and Saints they could draw more inspiration from them as 

--- PAGE 11 ---
FOREWORD 
Xl 
witnesses of the concrete results and rewards of a devotional life. But 
the majority of modern men are deprived of these privileges, for they are 
living in a civilization which a keen observer has wisely defined as 
"one vast conspiracy against the spiritual life." And so the wave of 
Karma keeps on rolling, and one is swept along by it regardless of his 
unwillingness and dismay. No one is foolish enough to think that the 
world will reverse itself and return to "the good old days"; what is 
gone is gone. All one can do, perhaps, is to make use of the best that 
the past has bequeathed us and apply it to the future and to the 
"here and now." Any person, message, or action that may spark a 
spiritual inspiration for men who must live in this age of spiritual undernourishment should, therefore, be of great value to all concerned, 
because they are what we need most, and what so rarely appear in 
our time. 
With this view in mind, Mr. Chang has spent many years in preparing the English translation of this great spiritual classic of Tibet, 
the Mila Grubum, or The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa, in 
the hope of making it available to the people of the West. 
What kind of a book is the Mila Grubum? An adequate answer to 
this question is extremely difficult to make. Beyond doubt, it is one of 
the greatest religious classics, ranking with the Mahiibhiirata, the Avataryisaka Sidra, the Old and New Testaments, and the like. But at the 
same time, it is far more- a different kind of book in its own right, 
and no real parallel can be found in the literary field. Because of its 
unique style, unusual setting, and comprehensive content, the Mila 
Grubum is a book hard to introduce and to appraise in the ordinary 
sense. Therefore, the best answer to the question, "What kind of a 
book is this Mila Grubum?" should be given by the individual reader 
himself through his own understanding and appreciation. 
I can perhaps speak now for myself as to why, among the many 
great religious classics, the Mila Grubum is a personal favorite. To 
name just a few, I may say first of all that I found this book to be 
an inexhaustible fountainhead of inspiration, an immense treasury of 
spiritual teachings, a repository of yogic instructions, a guide on the 
Bodhi-Path, and above all, an unfailing friend of the sincere devotee. 
Secondly, it provides inside information on the religious life of the 
Tibetan people -
laymen, yogis, and monks alike -
presenting a 
vivid picture of their spiritual problems, strivings, and accomplishments. 
In this book the profoundest ideas and teachings of Buddhism are revealed in sixty-one fascinating stories presented in simple language. 
The reading, therefore, is extremely pleasant and interesting. Since 
each story is an account of Milarepa's personal experience in a specific 

--- PAGE 12 ---
XII 
FOREWORD 
situation, the messages and instructions given therein carry, inherently, 
an unusual persuasive power and charm which truly move one to 
greater conviction, wider consolation, and deeper insight. In addition, 
the Grubum contains clear descriptions and unequivocal evaluations of 
critical yogic experiences, including those of the most advanced stages, 
hitherto unrevealed in other scriptures. 
If to evaluate the Mila Grubum is difficult, to praise it is even more 
so. Words, after all, may not be a good means of praise for a book 
of this kind. My sincere hope is that the readers may share with me, 
in silence and joy, a most rewarding experience in reading this beloved book of Tibet as millions of Tibetans once did, in the recent 
past and long ago. 
Oriental Studies Foundation 
New York 
September, 1962 
PETER GRUBER 

--- PAGE 13 ---
A WORD FROM 
THE TRANSLATOR 
M y Commentary, to be found in the Appendix under the title of 
"The 'Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa' -
Its Origin, Background, Function, and Translation," was originally designed to serve 
as an Introduction to this book. But in order to encourage the general 
reader's direct contact with the text itself, I have transferred my comments to the Appendix- together with other material of particular interest to serious students and scholars. For them, it is strongly recommended that this Commentary be read first. 
For readers who are not acquainted with the Tibetan literature, the 
actual sequence of the stories may not be the best way in which to read 
them. They follow each other in an interconnection which will be 
apparent enough to persons familiar with Tibetan literature; but the 
sequence may be more difficult to new readers. For them, I have starred 
certain representative stories in the Table of Contents, and recommend that they be read first. These will provide a cross-section of the 
three Parts into which the text is divided: Part One, stories concerned 
principally with Milarepa's subjugation and conversion of demons; 
Part Two, Milarepa's relationships with and instructions to his human 
disciples; and Part Three, miscellaneous stories that fall into no specific 
category. 
The stories in this book cover a wide range of spiritual problems 
and their solutions in the light of Buddhist doctrine and of mystic and 
yogic experiences. For information on Milarepa's life and the central 
Teaching of Tibetan Tantrism, please see my Commentary in the 
Appendix. 
Tibetan terms in the explanatory Notes are enclosed in parentheses 
and preceded by the letters "T.T.", denoting that these are Tibetan 
transcriptions as rendered in the English alphabet. 
I wish to express my sincerest gratitude to the Bollingen Foundation 
for its generous grant, which has made possible the completion of 
this work; to Mrs. Dorothy C. Donath and Mr. Gerald Yorke for their 
most helpful editorial suggestions and assistance; to Miss Toni Schmid 
of the Statens Ethnografiska Museum, Stockholm, Sweden, for her 
kind permission to use an illustration from her beautiful book, The 
X Ill 

--- PAGE 14 ---
XIV 
A WORD FROM THE TRANSLATOR 
Cotton-clad Mila, as our frontispiece; to Dr. W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Miss 
Natasha Rambova, Mr. Peter Gruber, and Miss Gwendolyn Winser, 
for their constant encouragement and aid; and to my wife, Hsianghsiang, for the typing of the entire manuscript and for her unfailing 
help and interest throughout the translation of this book. 
CARMA c. c. CHANG 

--- PAGE 15 ---
CONTENTS 
VOLUME I 
FOREWORD 
IX 
A WORD FROM THE TRANSLATOR 
xiii 
PART ONE. Milarepa's Subjugation and Conversion of Demons 
STORIES *1. The Tale of Red Rock Jewel Valley 
2. The Journey to Lashi 
*3. The Song of the Snow Ranges 
4. Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
5. Milarepa in Ragma 
6. Milarepa at Junpan Nanka Tsang 
*7. The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
· 8. Milarepa and the Pigeon 
PART TWO. Milarepa and His Human Disciples 
STORIES *9. The Gray Rock Vajra Enclosure 
*10. Milarepa's First Meeting with Rechungpa 
11. Admonishment on the "Rare Opportunity of 
Practicing the Dharma" 
*12. The Shepherd's Search for Mind 
13. The Song of Realization 
*14. A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
15. The Song at the Inn 
16. The Bandit-Disciple 
*17. The Meeting at Silver Spring 
18. The Song of the Staff 
19. The Twenty-one Exhortations 
*20. Milarepa's Meeting with Kar Chon Repa 
21. Admonishment to Dharma Wonshu 
XV 

--- PAGE 16 ---
XVI 
CONTENTS 
*22. The Miracle Contest on Di Se Snow 
Mountain 
*23. The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
*24. The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
*25. Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
*26. The Huntsman and the Deer 
27. The Invitation from the King of Nepal 
28. The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
29. The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
*30. Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
VOLUME II 
*31. Tserinma and the Mudra Practice 
32. Admonishment to Repa Dorje Wonshu 
*33. Milarepa's Meeting with Dharma Bodhi 
*34. The Challenge from the Logicians 
*35. Rechungpa's Third Journey to India 
36. The Realization of Megom Repa 
*37. Sable Aui and Her Understanding 
*38. The Story of the Yak-Hom 
*39. Rechungpa's Repentence 
*40. The Song of "How to Gain Happiness and 
Avoid Suffering" 
*41. The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost 
Disciple 
42. The Conversion of the Scholar, Lodun 
43. Song of the Eight Wondrous Joys 
*44. Milarepa Converts the Unbelievers Through 
Miracles 
PART THREE. Miscellaneous Stories 
STORIES 45. Various Short Tales 
*46. The Preaching on Mount Bonbo 
*47. The Miracle of the Vase Initiation 
*48. The Story of Shindormo and Lesebum 
*49. Milarepa and the Dying Sheep 
--- PAGE 17 ---
CONTENTS 
XVll 
50. The Beer-Drinking Song 
*51. Heartfelt Advice to Rechungpa 
*52. Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
*53. The l\leeting with Dhampa Sangje 
*54. The Salvation of the Dead 
55. Fulfillment of the J;)akinl's Prophecy 
56. Admonishments to Physician Tang Nge 
*57. Rechungpa's Departure 
58. The Story of Drashi Tse 
· 59. The Song of Good Companions 
60. The Evidence of Accomplishment 
61. The Miracles and the Last Admonishment 
Colophon 
APPENDIX 
"The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa"- Its Origin, 
Background, Function, and Translation 
692 
Glossary 
Table of Tibetan Words 
INDEX 
*It is recommended that these stories be read first. See "A Word from the Trans· 
lator," p. xiii. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
PART ONE 
MILAREPA'S 
SUBJUGATION AND 
CONVERSION OF 
DEMONS 

--- PAGE 21 ---
THE TALE OF RED ROCK 
JEWEL VALLEY 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O NCE the great Yogi Milarepa was staying at the Eagle Castle of 
[Red Rock] Jewel Valley,! absorbing himself in the practice of the 
Mahamudra meditation.2 Feeling hungry, he decided to prepare some 
food, but after looking about he found there was nothing left in the 
cave, neither water nor fuel, let alone salt, oil, or flour. "It seems 
that I have neglected things too much!" he:: said, "I must go out and 
collect some wood." 
He went out. But when he had gathered a handful of twigs, a sudden storm arose, and the wind was strong enough to blow away the 
wood and tear his ragged robe. When he tried to hold the robe together, the wood blew away. When he tried to clutch the wood, the 
robe blew apart. [Frustrated}, Milarepa thought, "Although I have 
been practicing the Dharma3 and living in solitude for such a long 
time, I am still not rid of ego-clinging! What is the use of practicing 
Dharma if one cannot subdue ego-clinging? Let the wind blow my 
wood away if it likes. Let the wind blow my robe off if it wishes!" 
Thinking thus, he ceased resisting. But, due to weakness from lack of 
food, with the next gust of wind he could no longer withstand the 
storm, and fell down in a faint. 
Wh"en he came to, the storm was over. High up on the branch of 
a tree he saw a shred of his clothing swaying in the gentle breeze. 
The utter futility of this world and all its affairs struck Milarepa, and 
a strong· feeling of renunciation overwhelmed him. Sitting down upon 
a rock, he meditated once more. 
Soori, a cluster of white clouds rose from Dro Wo Valley4 far 
away to the East. "Below this bank of clouds lies the temple of my 
Guru, the great Translator Marpa,"5 mused Milarepa, "At this very 
--- PAGE 22 ---
moment He and His wife must be preaching the doctrines of Tantra, 
giving initiation and instruction to my brothers. Yes, my Guru is 
there. If I could go there now, I should be able to see Him." An immeasurable, unbearable longing for his teacher arose in his heart as 
he thought despairingly of his Guru. His eyes filled with tears, and he 
began to sing a song, ''Thoughts of My Guru": 
In thoughts of you, Father Marpa, my 
suffering is relieved; 
I, the mendicant, now sing you a fervent song. 
Above Red Rock Jewel Valley, in the East, 
Floats a cluster of white clouds; 
Beneath them, like a rearing elephant, a 
huge mountain towers; 
Beside it, like a lion leaping, looms another peak. 
In the temple of Oro Wo Valley rests a great 
seat of stone; 
Who is now enthroned there? 
Is it Marpa the Translator? 
If it were you, I would be joyful and happy. 
Though limited in reverence, I wish to see you; 
Though weak in faith, I wish to join you. 
The more I meditate, the more I long for my Guru. 
Does your wife, Dagmema, still dwell with you? 
To her I am more grateful than to my mother. 
If she is there I will be joyful and happy. 
Though long the journey, I wish to see her, 
Though perilous the road, I wish to join her. 
The more I contemplate, the more I think of you; 
The more I meditate, the more I think of my Guru. 
How happy I would be could I join the gathering, 
At which you may be preaching the Hevajra Tantra.6 
Though of simple mind, I wish to learn. 
Though ignorant, I long to recite. 
The more I contemplate, the more I think of you; 
The more I meditate, the more I think of my Guru. 
You may now be giving the Four Symbolic 
Initiations7 of the Oral Transmission;8 

--- PAGE 23 ---
The Tale of Red Rock Jewel Valley 
If I could join the gathering, I would be 
joyful and happy. 
Tho1,1gh lacking merit, I wish to be initiatedThough too poor to offer much, I desire it. 
The more I contemplate, the more I think of you; 
The more I meditate, the more I think of my Guru. 
You may now be teaching the Six Yogas 
of Naropa;9 
If I could be there, I would be joyful and happy. 
Though short my diligence, I have need for 
learning; 
Though poor my perseverance, I wish to practice. 
The more I contemplate, the more I think of you; 
The more I meditate, the more I think of my Guru. 
The brothers from W eu and Tsang may be there. 
If so, I would be joyful and happy. 
Though inferior my Experience and Realization, 
I wish to compare mine with theirs. 
Though in my deepest faith and veneration 
I have never been apart from you, 
I am now tortured by my need to see you. 
This fervent longing agonizes me, 
This great torment suffocates me. 
Pray, my gracious Guru, relieve me from this 
torment. 
No sooner had Milarepa finished than the Revered One, the Jetsun10 Marpa, appeared on a cluster of rainbow clouds resembling a 
robe of five colors. With an ever-increasing [celestial] radiance suffusing his countenance, and riding a lion with rich trappings, he approached Milarepa. 
"Great Sorcerer,11 my son, why with such deep emotion," he asked, 
"did you call to me so desperately? Why do you struggle so? Have you 
not an abiding faith in your Guru and Patron Buddha? Does the 
outer world attract you with disturbing thoughts?12 Do the Eight 
Worldly Windsta howl in your cave? Do fear and longing sap your 
strength? Have you not continuously offered service to the Guru and 
to the Three Precious Onesa above? Have you not dedicated your 
merits to sentient beings15 in the Six Realms?18 Have not you yourself reached that state of grace in which you can purify your sins and 
achieve merits? No matter what the cause, you may be certain that 

--- PAGE 24 ---
we will never part. Thus, for the sake of the Dharma and the welfare of sentient beings, continue your meditation." 
Inspired by this sublimely joyous vision, Milarepa sang in reply: 
When I see my Guru's countenance and hear his words, 
I, the mendicant, am stirred by the Pri'u;~a in 
my heartP 
In remembrance of the teachings of my Guru, 
Respect and reverence arise in my heart. 
His compassionate blessings enter me; 
All destructive thoughts18 are banished. 
My earnest song, called "Thoughts of my Guru," 
Must surely have been heard by you, my teacher; 
Yet am I still in darkness. 
Pray, pity me and grant me your protection! 
Indomitable perseverance 
Is the highest offering to my Guru. 
The best way to please Him 
Is to endure the hardship of meditation! 
Abiding in this cave, alone, 
Is the noblest service to the 1;)akinisJ19 
To devote myself to the Holy Dharma 
Is the best service to BuddhismTo devote my life to meditation, thus 
To aid my helpless, sentient fellow beings! 
To love death and sickness is a blessing 
Through which to cleanse one's sins; 
To refuse forbidden food helps one to attain 
Realization and Enlightenment; 
To repay my Father Guru's bounties 
I meditate, and meditate again. 
Guru mine, pray grant me your protection! 
Help this mendicant to stay ever in his hermitage. 
Exalted, Milarepa adjusted his robe and carried a handful of wood 
back to his cave. Inside, he was startled to find five Indian demons 
with eyes as large as saucers. One was sitting on his bed and preaching, two were listening to the sermon, another was preparing and 
offering food, and the last was studying Milarepa's books. 
Following his initial shock, Milarepa thought, "These must be magi-

--- PAGE 25 ---
The Tale of Red Rock Jewel Valley 
cal appanbons of the local deities who dislike me. Although I have 
been living here a long time, I have never given them any offering 
or compliment." He then began to sing a "Complimentary Song to the 
Deities of Red Rock Jewel Valley": 
This lonely spot where stands my hut 
Is a place pleasing to the Buddhas, 
A place where accomplished beings dwell, 
A refuge where I dwell alone. 
Above Red Rock Jewel Valley 
White clouds are gliding; 
Below, the Tsang River gently flows; 
Wild vultures wheel between. 
Bees are humming among the flowers, 
Intoxicated by their fragrance; 
In the trees birds swoop and dart, 
Filling the air with their song. 
In Red Rock Jewel Valley 
Young sparrows learn to fly, 
Monkeys love to leap and swing, 
And beasts to run and race, 
While I practice the Two Bodhi-Minds20 
and love to meditate. 
Ye local demons,21 ghosts,22 and gods, 
All friends of Milarepa, 
Drink the nectar of kindness and compassion, 
Then return to your abodes. 
But the Indian demons did not vanish, and stared balefully at Milarepa. Two of them advanced, one grimacing and biting his lower lip, 
and the other grinding his teeth horribly. A third, coming up behind, 
gave a violent, malicious laugh and shouted loudly, as they all tried 
to frighten Milarepa with fearful grimaces and gestures. 
Milarepa, knowing their evil motives, began the Wrathful Buddha 
Meditation and recited forcefully a powerful incantation.23 Still the 
demons would not leave. Then, with great compassion, he preached 
the Dharma to them; yet they still remained. 
Milarepa finally declared, "Through the mercy of Marpa, I have already fully realized that all beings and all phenomena are of one's 
own mind. The mind itself is a transparency of Voidness.'' What, 

--- PAGE 26 ---
therefore, is the use of all this, and how foolish I am to try to dispel 
these manifestations physically!"2G 
Then Milarepa, in a dauntless mood, sang "The Song of Realization": 
Father Guru, who conquered the Four Demons,28 
I bow to you, Marpa the Translator. 
I, whom you see, the man with a name, 
Son of Darsen Gharmo,27 
Was nurtured in my mother's womb, 
Completing the Three Veins.28 
A baby, I slept in my cradle; 
A youth, I watched the door; 
A man, I lived on the high mountain. 
Though the storm on the snow peak is awesome, 
I have no fear. 
Though the precipice is steep and perilous, 
I am not afraid! 
I, whom you see, the man with a name, 
Am a son of the Golden Eagle;29 
I grew wings and feathers in the egg. 
A child, I slept in my cradle; 
A youth, I watched the door; 
A man, I flew in the sky. 
Though the sky is high and wide, I do not fear; 
Though the way is steep and narrow, I am not afraid. 
I, whom you see, the man with a name, 
Am a son of Nya Chen Yor Mo,30 the King of fishes. 
In my mother's womb, I rolled my golden eyes; 
A child, I slept in my cradle; 
A youth, I learned to swim; 
A man, I swam in the great ocean. 
Though thundering waves are frightening, 
I do not fear; 
Though fishing hooks abound, I am not afraid. 
I, whom you see, the man with a name, 
Am a son of Ghagyu Lamas. 
Faith grew in my mother's womb. 
A baby, I entered the door of Dharma; 

--- PAGE 27 ---
The Tale of Red Rock Jewel Valley 
A youth, I studied Buddha's teaching; 
A man, I lived alone in caves. 
Though demons, ghosts, and devils multiply, 
I am not afraid. 
The snow-lion's paws are never frozen, 
Or of what use would it be 
To call the lion "King"-
He who has the Three Perfect Powers.31 
The eagle never falls down from the sky; 
If so, would that not be absurd? 
An iron block cannot be cracked by a stone; 
If so, why refine the iron ore? 
I, Milarepa, fear neither demons nor evils; 
If they frightened Milarepa, to what avail 
Would be his Realization and Enlightenment? 
Ye ghosts and demons, enemies of the Dharma, 
I welcome you today! 
It is my pleasure to receive you! 
I pray you, stay; do not hasten to leave; 
We will discourse and play together. 
Although you would be gone, stay the night; 
We will pit the Black against the White Dharma,32 
And see who plays the best. 
Before you came, you vowed to afflict me. 
Shame and disgrace would follow 
If you returned with this vow unfulfilled. 
Mila~pa arose with confidence and rushed straight at the demons 
in his cave. Frightened, they shrank back, rolling their eyes in despair 
and trembling violently. Then, swirling together like'a whirlpool, they 
all merged into one and vanished. 
"This was the Demon King, Viniiyaka33 the Obstacle-Maker, who 
came searching for evil opportunities," thought Milarepa. "The storm, 
too, was undoubtedly his creation. By the mercy of my Guru he had 
no chance to harm me." 
After this, Milarepa gained immeasurable spiritual progress. 
This story relates the attack of the Demon King Vinayaka; it has 
three different meanings, and hence may be called either "The Six 
Ways of Thinking of My Guru," "The Tale of Red Rock Jewel Valley," or "The Story of Milarepa Collecting Wood." 

--- PAGE 28 ---
NOTES 
l The Eagle Castle of Red Rock Jewel Valley (T.T.: mChmi.Lun. Khyuft. 
Gi.rDson.). :\!though "mChon" usually means to leap or jump, here it seems 
better to translate it as "Gem," or "Jewel"- the other meaning of the word. 
2 Mahamudra (T.T.: Phyag.rGya.Chen.Po.), meaning the "Great Symbol," 
is the practical teaching of Siinyata (Voidness). Siinyata is the principle that 
stresses the non·existence of the "substance" of all beings, which is the most important doctrine of Mahayana Buddhism as well as of Tibetan Tantrism. According to some Tibetan scholars, the Madhyamika (Middle Way Doctrine), is a 
teaching of Siinyata in its general form. while Mahamudra is a teaching of Siinyata 
by which one can actually put the Madhyamika principles into practice. Madhyamika is often referred to as the "Theory of Voidness," and 1\!ahamudra, "The 
Practice of Voidness." 
At this point a few words on "Voidness" may be helpful. When we say ''That 
house is empty," we mean that it contains no occupants; bot Buddhist ''Voidness" 
does not mean absence. When we say, "That whole block is now empty," we mean 
there were houses in the block before, but none exist now; but Buddhist "Void· 
ness" does not mean extinction. Voidness is difficult to define and describe. We 
can say a great deal about what Voidness is not, but very little about what it is. 
Voidness denotes the relative, flowing, undefinable, and ungraspable nature of all 
things. Philosophically it represents the illusory and dream-like nature of phenom· 
ena; psychologically it signifies a total liberation from all bondage. 
The Whispered Transmission School (Ghagyuba, T.T.: bKah.rGyud.Pa.) and 
the Old School (Ningmaba, T.T.: rl\lin.Ma.Pa.) in Tibet, regard Mahamudra as 
the highest and most important of all the teachings of Buddhism. But the Yellow 
School (Gelugba, T.T.: dGe.Lugs.Pa.) does not entirely agree with this view. 
Mahamudra is, in many ways, very similar to Chinese Ch'an (Zen.) See 
the translator's "Yogic Commentary" in "Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines," 
2nd ed., W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Ed., Oxford University Press, London, 1958. 
3 Dharma: This term, most frequently employed in Buddhist literature, 
has two common usages: to denote the teaching of Buddha, sometimes translated 
as the Law or Doctrine; and to denote being or objects. Here it is used in the 
former sense. 
4 Dro Wo Valley: the location of Marpa's temple. 
5 Marpa the Translator was Milarepa's teacher. He was a great scholar as well 
as a great yogi, who founded the Oral, or Whispered Transmission School 
(Ghagyuba) of Tibet. 
6 Hevajra: a Sanskrit name; its Tibeta'l equivalent is dGyes.Pa.rDor.rJe. To 
help readers who are not familiar with the Tibetan words, many equivalent Sanskrit names and terms are also used in the translation and Notes. 
7 The Four Symbolic Initiations (T.T.: dWan.bShi.): The first initiation is 
called 'The Initiation of the Vase." The person who has taken it is allowed to 
practice Mantra Yoga. The second is called "The Secret Initiation," and gives 
the initiate the privilege of practicing Prat:~a Yoga. The third is called "The \Vis· 
dom Initiation," and allows the initiate to practice advanced 
Prat:~a Yoga. The 
fourth is called "The Symbolic Initiation," and confers the privilege of practicing 
Mahamudra Yoga. These four initiations embrace almost all the major teachings 
of Tibetan Tantrism. 
8 The Oral Transmission (T.T.: bKah.rGyud.Pa.), is translated in this book 

--- PAGE 29 ---
The Tale of Red Rock Jewel Valley 
in several different ways: Whispered, or Oral Succession, Transmission, or Lineage. 
This School (the Ghagyuba) in its early period, stressed the Yoga practice and 
tradition- including secrecy by transmitting the teachings orally. Later, when it 
grew into a large monastic Order, this tradition was partially lost. 
9 Naro Chu Dru (T.T.: Naro.Chos.Drug.): The Six Yogas of Naropa are as 
follows: (1) Heat Yoga, (2) Dream Yoga, (3) Illusory Body Yoga, (4) Bardo 
Yoga, (5) Yoga of Transformation, and (6) Yoga of Light. 
10 Jetsun (T.T.: rJe.bTsun.): A Tibetan term of reverence and respect given to 
religious leaders, saints, and great teachers. 
11 Great Sorcerer: Milarepa's nickname. See Milarepa's Biography. "Tibet's 
Great Yogi, Milarepa," W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Ed., Oxford University Press, Lon· 
don, 1951. 
12 Disturbing thoughts, Nhamdog (T.T.: rNam.rTog.) is a very frequently 
used term in Buddhist literature as well as in this book. Nhamdog has many mean· 
ings, the most common one being "disturbing thoughts" or "Rowing thoughts." 
This constant .Row of thoughts never stops, though men may not be aware of its 
existence. To curb and halt this unceasing thought-Row is a prerequisite for the attainment of Samadhi. Nhamdog also means wild thoughts, wrong judgements, fan· 
tasy, whims, imagination, impulse, and so forth. 
13 Eight Worldly Winds or Dharmas (T.T.: Chos.brGyad.): the eight "winds," 
or influences, which fan the passions, i.e., gain, loss; ·defamation, eulogy; praise, 
ridicule; sorrow, joy. This term is also translated in this book as "Eight Worldly 
Desires." 
14 The Three Precious Ones, or the Three Gems: the Buddha; the Dharma; 
and the Sangha. Buddha is He who has attained Perfect Enlightenment, Dharma 
is His teachings, Sangha the enlightened Buddhist sages. 
1 5 Sentient beings: a term for mankind and all living beings, for whose 
benefit Dharmic training is undertaken and to whom all merits are dedicated. 
16 Six Realms, or Six Lokas: the six Realms in SaJllsara, i.e., the Realms of 
Hell, of Hungry Ghosts, of Animals, of Asuras or Non-men, of Mankind, and of the 
Heavenly Beings. 
17 Heart-Pra1,1a or Heart-Wind (T.T.: sl'ilin.Rlun.; pron.: Nin Lung): It is believed that most visions seen and emotions felt in meditation are caused by Pra1,1a 
from the Heart Center. 
18 Destructive thoughts: non-Dharmic thoughts, or thoughts which are 
against the Buddhist teachings. 
19 I;>akinis (T.T.: mKhah.hGro.Ma.): female sky-travelers, or goddesses. I;>iik· 
inis are female deities who play very important roles in performing various Tantric 
acts. 
20 The Two Bodhi-Minds (T.T.: Byan.Chub.Sems.gl'ilis.): These are the Mun· 
dane and the Transcendental Bodhi-Minds (T.T.: Kun.rDsob. [and] Don.Dam. 
Byan.Chub.Gyi.Scms.); or the Bodhi-Mind-as-a-Wish (sMon.Pa.Byaii.Chub.Gyi. 
Sems.) and the Bodhi-Mind-as-a-Practice (sPyod.Pa.Byan.Chub.Gyi.Sems.). Bodhi· 
Mind is perhaps the most important term which symbolizes and represents the 
central spirit, idea, and principle of Mahayana Buddhism. Because of its manifold 
meanings and usages, Bodhi-Mind (Skt: Bodhicitta; T.T.: Byan.Chub.Sems.) is ex· 
tremely difficult to translate. Bodhi-Mind can perhaps be roughly described as the 
wish, vow, aspiration, and realization of the noble idea of bringing oneself and all 
sentient beings to the state of great perfection- Buddhahood. The following are 
a few examples of the variance of this term in denoting the different aspects of the 
Bodhi-Mind: 
(1) Bodhi-Mind-as-a-Wish: the wish, vow, or aspiration to deliver all 

--- PAGE 30 ---
sentient beings from all suffering, and to bring them to the state of 
Buddha hood. 
(2) Bodhi·Mind·as·Practice: the aspiration, determination, and 
practice of all meritorious deeds in the light of Dharma, which include 
the Six Paramitas, and other Bodhisattvic practices. 
(3) Mundane Bodhi-Mind: the Bodhi-Mind of a person who has not yet 
realized the truth of Sunyata (Voidness). 
(4) Transcendental Bodhi·Mind: the Bodhi-Mind of a person who has 
realized the truth of Sunyata (Voidness). 
(5) Bodhi-Mind, as "borrowed" by Tantrism, is used to denote the essence of the positive and negative energy, i.e., seed or semen (T.T.: 
Tig.Le.) 
Bodhi-Mind is sometimes translated in different contexts as Bodhi-Heart, 
Heart-for-Bodhi, Enlightened Mind, and the Great Compassionate Mind. 
21 Lit.: Jung Bo (T.T.: hByuii.Po.): a type of Tibetan demon. 
22 Lit.: Non·mcn (T.T.: Mi.Ma.Yin.): the general term for demons, ghosts, 
Asuras, or heavenly beings. 
23 Powerful incantation (T.T.: Drag.s~ags.): a potent Mantra or spell to dispel demons and obstacles. It includes mantras, mudras, visualization, and other ritualistic practices. 
24 According to Mahamudra, the nature of mind can best be described as 
being the Illumination·of-Voidness, or the Illuminating-Void (T.T.: gSal.sToil.). It 
teaches that the primordial nature of mind is not only "void" in its essence, but is 
also an illuminating self-awareness embodied in the Void. 
25 Lit.: " ... how foolish I am to try to dispel these demons and troublemakers outwardly." 
26 Four Demons: the four major hindrances that impede one's spiritual progress arc figuratively called "The Four Demons." They are: the demons of illness, 
of interruption, of death, and of desires and passions. 
27 Darsen Gharmo: the name of the snow lioness. See first song of Story 4. 
28 Lit.: Completing the Three Nac;lis. These are the three mystic Channels in 
the human body- the Right, the Left, and the Center. The Right Channel 
(T.T.: Ro.Ma.rTsa.; Skt.: Pi~gala Nac;li), is said to correspond to the solar system; 
the Left (T.T.: rKyaii.Ma.rTsa.; Skt.: Ida Nac;li) to the lunar system; the Center 
Channel (T.T.: dBu.Ma.rTsa.; Skt.: Su~um~a Nadi) to Unity. Tibetan scholars have 
given many differing opinions and explanations regarding these three mystical Channels. A single clear-cut definition or description of them is very difficult. 
29 Lit.: The King-bird Eagle (T.T.: Bya.rGyai.Khyail.) or the Garuda bird. 
30 Nya Chen Yor Mo (T.T.: !'ila.Chen.Yor.Mo.): the King of all fish, according to Tibetan legend. 
31 The translator is not certain as to what these three legendary "perfect 
powers of the lion" found in Tibetan folklore may be. However, they do imply three 
superior qualities of this animal. 
32 The Black Dharma is black magic; the white Dharma, the teaching of 
Buddha. 
33 Vinayaka (T.T.: Bi.Na.Ya.Ga.): A particular class of demon. According 
to some sources, it is another name for "Gat;esa" or for "Garuc;la." 

--- PAGE 31 ---
THE JOURNEY TO LASHI 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O NCE, when the great Master of Yoga, Jetsun1 Milarepa, was staying 
in the Jewel Valley hermitage, he thought, "I should obey my 
Guru's order to go to Lashi Snow Mountain and practice meditation 
there," and set out for that place. 
Milarepa approached Nya Non Tsar Ma, the gateway to Lashi 
Snow Mountain, where the people of Tsar Ma were holding a drinking party. In their talk, someone asked, "Do you know that at the 
present time there lives a great yogi called Milarepa? He always dwells 
alone in the snow mountains, in remote and uninhabited places, observing an ascetic discipline which none except the perfect Buddhist 
can attain. Have you ever heard of him?" While they were thus praising the Jetsun, Milarepa arrived at the door. A beautiful girl named 
Lesebum, decked with rich ornaments, greeted him there, asking, "Who 
are you and where do you come from?" "Dear hostess," Milarepa replied, "I am the Yogi Milarepa, who always dwells in unknown places 
in the mountains. I came here to beg food." "I will gladly give you 
some," said the girl, "but are you really Milarepa?" He replied, "There 
is no reason why I should lie to you." The girl, delighted, immediately 
rushed back into the house to spread the news. She called all the revelers, saying, "You were talking about that celebrated yogi who lives 
so far away. He is now standing at the door." 
Everyone rushed to the door, some making obeisance to the Jetsun, 
others asking him various questions. All became aware that he was the 
actual Milarepa. Then they invited him in, paid him great respect 
and reverence, and gave him food. 
The hostess, a rich young girl named Shindormo, extended her hospitality to the Jetsun, and asked, "Revered one, may I ask where you 
are going?" Milarepa replied, "I am on my way to Lashi Snow Mountain to practice meditation." The girl then said, "We hope you will 
grant us the boon of staying in Dreloon Joomoo and blessing this 
--- PAGE 32 ---
place. We will provide all the food you need without any effort on 
your part." 
Among the guests was a teacher called Shaja Guna, who said to 
Milarepa, "If you would be kind enough to remain here in Dreloon 
Joomoo, the valley of ghosts, it would help you and would also help 
us. I shall try my best to serve you." A layman exclaimed, "How wonderful it would be if we could have the great Yogi staying with us! 
I have a fine cattle farm, but the demons and ghosts are becoming so 
bold that they actually appear [even in the daytime]! They are so 
vicious that even I do not dare to go near the place any more. I beseech you, in your kindness and grace, to vist my farm very soon." All 
the guests then made obeisance to the Jetsun, begging him to go to 
the farm. 
Milarepa replied, "I will go there at once-not because of your farm 
and cattle, but in obedience to my Guru." 
"We are satisfied as long as you have promised to go," they declared. 
"Now, let us prepare the best food and arrange for your departure." 
Milarepa then said, "I am accustomed to solitude ... I dwell in a 
hermitage and need neither companionship nor good food. But please 
accept my gratitude for your thoughtfulness in offering it. First, I 
should like to go to the far:m alone. Afterwards, you may come and 
see what has been done." 
When Milarepa arrived at the foot of the mountain, the Non-men 
created frightful hallucinations to harass him. The path to the top of 
the peak, which seemed to reach to the sky, quaked and tossed. Angry 
thunder rolled, jagged lightning struck all around, and the mountains 
on both sides trembled and shifted. The river suddenly became a raging torrent and burst its banks, turning the valley into a vast lake, 
in later years called Demon Lake. Milarepa arose and made a gesture, 
and the flood at once subsided. He went on to the lower part of 
the valley. The demons shattered the mountains on both sides, and 
showers of tumbling rocks fell like heavy rain. Then the Hill Goddess 
created for the Jetsun a path like a running snake along the range, 
a track later called Hill Goddess Path [or Oakini's Ridge). This subdued all the lesser demons, but the greater and more powerful demons, 
angered by their failure, gathered round the end of Hill Goddess Path 
to unleash a new attack. Milarepa concentrated his mind, and made 
another mystic gesture to subdue them. Suddenly all the evil visions 
disappeared. A footprint was impressed in the rock where Milarepa 
had stood.2 He had gone only a few steps when the whole sky cleared. 
In an exalted mood, he then sat down at the top of the hill; he 
entered the Samiidhi of Mercy,3 and an immeasurable compassion 
toward all sentient beings arose in his heart. Because of this, Milarepa 

--- PAGE 33 ---
The Journey to Lashi 
experienced great spiritual growth and inspiration. Later, the place 
where he sat was called the Hill of Mercy. 
Milarepa then went to the bank of the river [lit.: Good River], 
where he practiced the Flowing-River Yoga [Samadhi].4 
On the tenth day of the autumn moon of the Fire Tiger Year, a 
demon from Nepal called Bha Ro, leading a vast demonic army 
which filled the earth and sky in the valley of Good River, came to challenge Milarepa. The demons shifted the mountains and threw them 
down upon the Jetsun, and attacked him with thunderbolts and a rain 
of weapons. They screamed at him, abusing him with threats: "We'll 
kil1 you! We'll tie you up and chop you into pieces!" and on and on. 
They also appeared in hideous and dreadful shapes to frighten him. 
Sensing the evil purpose of the demon army, Milarepa sang "The 
Truth of Karma": 
I take refuge in all gracious Gurus, 
And pay homage to them. 
Through mirages and illusions, 
You pernicious male and female devils 
Can create these fantastic terrors. 
You pitiable Ah Tsa Ma demons,5 hungry ghosts, 
You can never harm me. 
Because your sinful Karma in the past 
Has fully ripened,6 you have received 
Demonic bodies for this life. 
With minds and bodies so deformed, 
You wander in the sky forever. 
Driven by the fiery Kl~as, 7 
Your minds are filled with hostile and 
vicious thoughts. 
Your deeds and words are malignant and destructive. 
You screamed, "Ki11 him! Chop him! Beat him! 
Cut him up!" 
I am a yogi who is devoid of thoughts,8 
Knowing that there is no such thing as mind. 
Walking valiant as a lion, 
Actions fearless as the brave, 

--- PAGE 34 ---
My body merges with the body of Buddha, 
My words are like the true words of the Tathagata, 
My mind is absorbed in the Realm of Great Light.9 
I see clearly the void nature of the Six 
Groups.10 
A yogi, such as I, ignores the abuse of 
hungry ghosts! 
If the Law of Cause and Effect is valid, 
And one commits the deeds deserving of it, 
The force of Ripened Karma 11 will drive him down 
Into the miserable Path 
Of suffering and grief. 
It is distressing and woeful that you 
ghosts and demons 
Should not understand the Truth!12 
I, the plain-looking Milarepa, 
Now preach to you the song of Dharma. 
All sentient beings who live by nourishment 
Are my fathers and my mothers! 
To afflict those to whom we owe gratitude 
Is indeed senseless and foolish! 
Would it not be a happy and a joyous act 
If you were to renounce your vicious thoughts? 
Would it not be a blessed and joyful thing 
If you were to practice the Ten Virtues?13 
Remember this and ponder its meaning, 
Exert yourselves and carefully consider it. 
The demons then scoffed at Milarepa: "Your rambling talk will 
not deceive us. We refuse to cease our magic and set you free." They 
then multiplied their supernatural weapons and increased the force of 
their demonic army to afflict him. Milarepa pondered awhile and then 
said, "Hearken to me, you army of demons! By the grace of my Guru 
I have become a yogi who has fully realized the Ultimate Truth. To 
me, the afflictions and obstructions caused by demons are the glories 
of a yogi's mind. The greater such affliction, the more I gain in the 
Path of Bodhi.14 Now listen to my song of 'The Seven Adornments'": 
I pay homage to Marpa the Translator, 

--- PAGE 35 ---
The Journey to Lashi 
I, who see the ultimate essence of being, 
Sing the song of [Seven] Adornments. 
You mischievous demons here assembled, 
Lend your ears and listen closely to my song. 
By the side of Sumeru,15 the central mountain, 
The sky shines blue o'er the Southern Continent;16 
The firmament is the beauty of the earth, 
The blue of heaven its adornment. 
High above the Great Tree of Sumeru17 
Shine radiant beams from sun and moon, 
Lighting the Four Continents. 
With love and compassion, the Naga King18 
wields his miraculous power: 
From the immense sky, he lets fall the rain. 
Of the earth, this is the adornment. 
From the great ocean vapors rise, 
Reaching the vast sky. 
They form great clouds; 
A causal law governs the transformations 
of the elements. 
In midsummer, rainbows appear above the plain, 
Gently resting upon the hills. 
Of the plains and mountains, 
The rainbow is the beauty and adornment. 
In the \Vest, when rain falls in the cold ocean, 
Bushes and trees flourish on the earth. 
To all creatures on the Continent, 
These are the beauty and adornment. 
I, the Yogi who desires to remain in solitude, 
Meditate on the Voidness of Mind. 
Awed by the power of my concentration, 
You jealous demons are forced to practice magic. 
Of the yogi, demonic conjurations 
Are the beauty and adornment. 
You Non-men, listen closely and hearken to me! 
--- PAGE 36 ---
Do you know who I am? 
I am the Yogi Milarepa; 
From my heart emerges 
The flower of Mind-Enlightenment. 
With a clear voice19 I sing this allegory to you, 
With sincere words I preach the Dharma for you, 
With a gracious heart I give you this ·advice. 
If in your hearts the Will-for-Bodhi20 sprouts, 
Though you may not be of help to others, 
By renouncing the Ten Evils,21 
Know that you will win joy and liberation. 
If you follow my teachings, 
Your accomplishments will increase greatly; 
If you practice the Dharma now, 
Everlasting joy will at last enfold you. 
Most of the demons were converted by the song, becoming faithful 
and respectful to Milarepa, and the evil conjurations ceased. They 
said, "You are indeed a great yogi of marvelous powers. Without your 
explanation of the Truth, and the revelation of your miraculous powers, we would never have understood. Henceforth, we will not trouble 
you. We are also most grateful for your preaching of the truth of Karma. 
In all frankness, we are of limited intelligence and limitless ignorance. 
Our minds are steeped in a morass of stubborn habitual thoughts.22 
Pray, therefore, teach us a lesson profound in meaning, great in profit, 
and simple in comprehension and observation." 
Milarepa then sang "The Song of the Seven Truths": 
I make obeisance to you, Marpa the Translator. 
I pray that you grant me increase of Bodhi-Mind. 
However beautiful a song's words may be, 
It is but a tune to those 
Who grasp not the words of Truth. 
If a parable agrees not with Buddha's teaching, 
However eloquent it may sound, 
'Tis but a booming echo. 
If one does not practice Dharma, 
However learned in the Doctrines one may claim to be, 
One is only self-deceived. 

--- PAGE 37 ---
The Journey to l.Ashi 
Living in solitude is self-imprisonment, 
If one practice not the instruction of the 
Oral Transmission. 
Labor on the farm is but self-punishment, 
If one neglects the teaching of the Buddha. 
For those who do not guard their morals, 
Prayers are but wishful thinking. 
FoP those who do not practice what they preach, 
Oratory is but faithless lying. 
Wrong-doing shunned, sins of themselves diminish; 
Good deeds done, merit will be gained. 
Remain in solitude, and meditate alone; 
Much talking is of no avail. 
Follow what I sing, and practice Dharma! 
Faith in Milarepa was further aroused in his listeners, and they 
paid him great respect. They made obeisances and circumambulated28 
him many times. Most of them then returned to their homes. But 
the leader of the demons, Bha Ro, and some of his followers still 
would not depart. Once again they conjured dreadful visions to frighten Milarepa, but he countered them with the song in which the truth 
of good and evil is told: 
I bow at the feet of gracious Marpa. 
Are you pemicious demons still in an angry mood? 
Your bodies through the sky can fly with ease, 
But your minds are filled with sinful habitual thoughts. 
You bare your deadly fangs to frighten others, 
But you may be sure, when you affiict them, 
You are only bringing trouble on yourselves. 
The Law of Karma never fails to function; 
No one escapes from its ripening.24 
You are only bringing trouble on yourselves, 
You hungry ghosts, confused and sinful! 
I feel only sorrow and pity for you. 
Since you are ever sinning, 
To be vicious is natural to you. 
Since the Karma of killing binds you, 

--- PAGE 38 ---
You relish meat and blood for food. 
By taking the lives of others, 
You are born as hungry ghosts. 
Your sinful deeds led you 
To the depths of the lower Path. 
Turn back, my friends, from this ensnaring Karma, 
And try to attain true happiness which is 
Beyond all hope and fear! 
The demons scoffed: "Your skillful impersonation of a preacher who 
knows the Doctrine thoroughly is most impressive, but what conviction have you gained from the practice of Dharma?" 
Milarepa replied with "The Song of Perfect Assurance": 
Obeisance to the perfect Marpa. 
I am the Yogi who perceives the Ultimate Truth. 
In the Origin of the Unborn, I first gain assurance; 
On the Path of Non·extinction, slowly 
I perfect my power; 
With meaningful symbols and words 
Flowing from my great compassion, 
I now sing this song 
From the absolute realm of Dharma Essence. 
Because your sinful Karma has created 
Dense blindness and impenetrable obstruction, 
You cannot understand the meaning 
Of Ultimate Truth. 
Listen, therefore, to the Expedient Truth.25 
In their spotless, ancient Siitras, 
All the Buddhas in the past, repeatedly 
Admonished with the eternal Truth of KarmaThat every sentient being is one's kinsman. 
This is eternal Truth which never fails. 
Listen closely to the teaching of Compassion. 
I, the Yogi who developed by his practices, 
Know that outer hindrances are but a shadow-show, 
And the phantasmal world 
A magic play of mind unborn. 

--- PAGE 39 ---
The Journey to Lashi 
By looking inward into the mind is seen 
Mind-nature-without substance, intrinsically void. 
Through meditation in solitude, the grace 
Of the Succession Gurus and the teaching 
Of the great Naropa26 are attained. 
The inner truth of the Buddha 
Should be the object of meditation. 
By the gracious instruction of my Guru, 
Is the abstruse inner meaning of Tantra understood. 
Through the practice of Arising and 
Perfecting Yoga, 27 
Is the Vital Power engendered 
And the inner reason for the microcosm realized. 
Thus in the outer world I do not fear 
The illusory obstacles. 
To the Great Divine Lineage I belong, 
With innumerable yogis great as all Space. 
When in one's own mind one ponders 
On the original state of Mind, 
Illusory thoughts of themselves dissolve 
Into the Realm of Dharmadhatu.28 
Neither affiicter nor affiicted can be seen. 
Exhaustive study of the Siitras 
Teaches us no more than this. 
The chief and subordinate demons then offered their skulls29 to 
Milarepa, made obeisance, and circumambulated him many times. 
They promised to bring him a month's supply of food, and vanished 
like a rainbow in the sky. 
The next morning at sunrise the demon Bha Ro brought from Mon 
many richly clad female ghosts and a numero~s retinue. They carried 
jeweled cups filled with wine, and brass plates heaped with many different foods, including rice and meat, which they offered to the Jetsun. 
Promising henceforward to serve and obey him, they bowed to him 
many times and disappeared. One of the demons, called Jarbo Ton 
Drem, was the leader of many Devas. 
Through this experience, Milarepa gained great yogic improvement. 
He remained there for a month, spirited and joyous, and without the 
pangs of hunger. 
_ 
One day, [when the month had passed,] Milarepa recalled a place 

--- PAGE 40 ---
in Lashi renowned for its good water, and decided to go there. On the 
way, he came to a plain dotted with flourishing tamarisks. In the middle of the plain rose a large rock with a projecting ledge above it. Milarepa sat upon the rock for a time; many goddesses appeared, bowed 
to him, and served him with desirable offerings. One of the goddesses 
also left two footprints on the rock, and then disappeared like a rainbow. 
As Milarepa proceeded on his way, a host of demons assembled and 
conjured visions of huge female organs on the road to shock him. 
Then the Jetsun concentrated his mind and exposed his erected male 
organ with a gesture. He went farther, and passing an apparition of 
nine female organs, reached a place with a rock shaped like a vagina 
standing in its center-the quintessence of the region. He inserted a 
phallic-shaped stone into the hollow of the rock, [a symbolic act)3° 
which dispersed the lascivious images created by the demons. The 
place was later called Ladgu Lungu. 
When Milarepa reached the middle of the plain, the demon Bha 
Ro returned to welcome him. He prepared a preaching seat for the 
Jetsun, gave offerings and service, and asked him for the Buddhist 
teachings. Milarepa lectured him comprehensively on Karma, and the 
demon then melted into a huge rock in front of the seat. 
Milarepa, in a very joyous state, remained on the central plain for 
a month, and then journeyed to Nya Non Tsar Ma. He told the 
people there that the plain had indeed been infamous until he had 
conquered its demons and transformed it to a place suitable for the 
practice of Dharma. He also told them he wanted to return there to 
mediate as soon as possible. After this, the people of Nya Non had 
deep faith in Milarepa. 
This is the story of "The Journey to Lashi." 
NOTES 
1 Meaning the "Revered One." See Story 1, Note 10. 
2 Tibetans believe that spiritually enlightened beings should be able to perform out·of·the·ordinary, or miraculous, deeds. To leave a footprint or handprint in 
hard material, such as rock, was considered a proof of a yogi's occult powers, and 
accomplishments. Much evidence of this belief can be found in Tibet. 
3 Samadhi of Mercy: According to Buddhism, Samiidhi is merely a mental state 
of deep concentration. It can be applied or utilized for any religious purpose. !low-

--- PAGE 41 ---
The Journey to Lashi 
ever, the power of Samadhi enables the yogi to accomplish almost all the spiritual 
wishes he may have. Here Samadhi is applied to the expansion and perfection of love 
or mercy. In other words, the Samadhi of Mercy is a deep and pure conscious state 
in which the purest love is brought to consummation. 
4 Flowing.River Yoga [Samadhi] (T.T.: Chu.Wo.rGyun.Gyi.rNal.hByor): In 
this Samiidhi the yogi experiences his identity with the flow of the Universe, yet he 
transcends it. He never withdraws from the flow, nor does he intend to ignore it; he 
is in it, but not bound by it. This Samadhi is the active or dynamic aspect of Ma· 
hiimudra Yoga. 
5 Ah Tsa Ma Demons (T.T.: A.Tsa.Ma.): a Tibetan name for Indian demons. 
6 Ripened Karma (T.T.: rNam.sMin.Gyi.Las.; Skt.: Vipaka Karma) may be 
translated as "fully ripened Karma," or "the Karmic force that ripens in different 
Jives." The Law of Karma says that usually a deed brings not merely one, but many, 
effects. For example, if a man commits murder, he will be punished by his con· 
science, by the law, by the ruin of his reputation and life, and so on. But this is not 
all. The force of Karma has not yet been exhausted. In a future incarnation, or in· 
carnations, the murderer will be subjected by this mysterious Karmic force to shorter 
lives and much sickness; or he will be prone to rebirths in times and lands where 
there are frequent wars and perils. This force, the Karma that ripens in different 
lives, seems to be the most fundamental and mysterious aspect of the Buddhist 
doctrine. 
7 Fiery Klesas: These are the strong desires and passions that cause all the 
pains and distresses of Saf!lsiiric life. 
8 Devoid of thoughts: An accomplished yogi should have freed himself from 
all thoughts or conceptualizations, be they simple or complex, good or evil, monis· 
tic or dualistic ... , then he is said to have acquired the Wisdom of Equality or 
Non-discrimination. 
9 The Realm of Great Light is the realm of primordial Buddhahood. The 
term "Light" should not be treated in its literal sense as denoting luminosity. It is 
actually beyond description and attribution. Free and universal clarity, devoid of 
the slightest clinging or attachment, perhaps can best be described in words as 
"Great Light." 
IO Six Groups (T.T.: Tsogs.Drug.): the Six Consciousnesses and the Six 
Sense Objects. The Six Consciousnesses are: consciousness of eye, ear, nose, tongue, 
body, and discernment (mind). The Six Sense Objects are: color or form, sound, 
smell, taste, touch, and dharma (being). 
I 1 See Note 6. 
I2 This sentence could also be translated " ... should not understand the hn· 
manent Truth." 
13 The Ten Virtues: These are the antitheses of the Ten Evils. See Note 2L 
14 Path of Bodhi: the Path that leads to Buddhahood. This is the practice of 
the Bodhisattva, as taught in Mahayana Buddhism. 
15 Sumeru: The legendary center of the Universe, an idea borrowed by the 
Buddhists from the Hindus, and believed by some modern scholars to represent a 
place in the Himalaya Mountains. 
16 Southern Continent: In Buddhist legends, the earth on which we live is 
the Southern Continent. There are four continents in this universe, floating in a sea: 
Northern, Eastern, Southern, and Western. In the center of these four continents 
stands the great mountain, Sumeru. 
I 7 The Great Tree of Sumeru: This refers to another Buddhist legend: 
From the bottom of the ocean grows a tree which reaches to the top of Heaven. The 

--- PAGE 42 ---
Asuras, who live in the ocean, quarreled and fought with the beings in Heaven over 
the ownership of this tree. 
18 The Naga King is the Dragon who controls rainfall. 
19 Milarepa is said to have had a very fine singing voice. See his Biography, 
"Tibet's Great Yogi, Milarepa," edited by W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Oxford University 
Press, 19 51. 
20 Or, Mind-for-Bodhi, Heart-for-Bodhi, or Bodhi-Mind (Skt.: Bodhicitta; 
T.T.: Byan.Chub.Sems.): "Bodhi" refers to the state of the realization of Buddhahood. "Mind-for-Bodhi" is the desire to attain such realization; but usually, this 
term implies more than just the wish; it also implies the vow to serve and save all 
sentient beings through meritorious deeds and spiritual practices, including the Six 
Paramitas. "Bodhicitta" is a tem1 of many connotations. It not only refers to the 
wish or "heart" for Buddhahood and the practices that lead toward it, but in many 
cases it refers to the intuitive wisdom with which the Ultimate Truth- the 
Dharmaki!ya- is realized. "Bodhicitta," therefore, can be translated as BodhiMind, Mind-for-Bodhi, Hcart-for-Bodhi, or, THE MIND OF BODI·II, depending 
on how it is used in different contexts. See Story 1, Note 20. 
21 The Ten Evils: killing, stealing, adultery, cheating, double-talk, coarse 
language, talking nonsense, covetousness, anger, and perverted views. 
22 Habitual thinking or thought (T.T.: Bag.Chags.): the force driving sentient beings in Saf!lslira. See Story 4, Note 11. 
23 Circumambulation: In paying homage to the Buddha, the Dharma, the 
Guru, or any revered monk, Buddhist disciples were in the habit of circling or walking around the person or object of veneration three times in a clockwise direction and 
then making obeisance. This custom, however, has died out in many Buddhist 
countries today. 
24 Karma-Ripening or in some cases, Ripened Karma (T.T.: rNam.sMin.): See 
Note 6. 
25 Expedient Truth (T.T.: Drafl.Don.): Because individuals and groups differ 
in their dispositions and capacities, it is not advisable to give the highest teaching to 
all. Expedient teachings that lead one toward the Final Truth are needed for the 
majority. These expedient teachings, however, are in principle in accord with, and 
in practice conducive to, the Final Truth. Thus they are also known as "Expedient 
Truths." It is in this light that the Mahayana Buddhist evaluates the various teachings from different schools and religions. 
26 Naropa: Marpa's teacher. 
27 Arising and Perfecting Yoga (T.T.: sKyed.Rim.Dafl.rDsogs.Rim.): In the 
Anuttara Tantra (the Highest Division of Tantra) there are two main practices: 
(1) The teaching of the "Successive Steps toward Creation" (T.T.: sKyes. 
Rim.), which may be translated as the "Arising, or Growing Yoga." 
It is a teaching and practice of identifying oneself with Tantric 
Creation. 
(2) The teaching of the "Successive Steps of Completion, or Perfection" 
(T.T.: rDsogs.Rim.), may be translated as the "Perfecting Yoga." 
This is the advanced type of Yoga practice in which one identifies 
oneself with the Ultimate Perfection, or the great Nirvlit;~a. 
28 Dharmadhlitu: The Absolute Universality, or the Truth of Totality. 
29 Offered their skulls: According to Tantric tradition, offering his skull is 
the most solemn pledge that a demon or ghost can make. It symbolizes the complete 
surrender of his body and soul to whomsoever his oath has been made. 
30 The meaning of this passage in the text is esoteric and therefore obscure; 
it may thus be subject to different interpretations. This is a free translation. 

--- PAGE 43 ---
THE SONG 
OF THE SNOVV RANGES 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
J 
ETSUN Milarepa's reputation for conquering malignant demons and 
ghosts grew as a result of his visit to the region of Lashi Snow Mountain. All the people of Nya Non village became his patrons and rendered him service and offerings. Among them was a lady named Wurmo, who with deep faith earnestly sought the teachings of the Dharma. 
She had a young son called Joupuva, whom she decided to offer to 
Milarcpa as a servant when the boy grew up. 
Milarepa was invited to stay at Nya Non Tsar Ma by the villagers, 
and while there was attended by his patroness, Shindormo. The Jetsun 
stayed in the village for some time, but soon became severely depressed 
by the worldliness of everyone. Indicating his unhappiness, he told the 
villagers that he wanted to return to Lashi Snow Mountain. 
The villagers then cried, "Revered One! It is simply for our own 
sake and not for the welfare of other sentient beings that we ask you 
to remain in our village this winter and teach us. You can conquer 
evil demons at any time. Next spring everything will be ready for 
your journey." Venerable Dunba1 Shajaguna [a priest] and Shindormo were especially earnest in their petitions: "The winter is coming, 
and you will meet too much difficulty and hardship on the snow 
mountain. Please postpone your departure until later." 
Disregarding their repeated supplications, Milarepa made up his 
mind to go. "I am a son of the Naropa Succession," he said. "I do 
not fear hardships and raging storms on the snow mountain. For me 
to remain permanently in a village would be far worse than death. 
My Guru Marpa also commanded me to avoid worldly distractions 
and to remain in solitude to pursue my devotions." 
Then the villagers of Tsar Ma quickly prepared provisions for him; 
--- PAGE 44 ---
before leaving, he promised to see those who would come to him for 
instruction in the Dharma during the winter. Dunba Shajaguna, Shindormo, and four others, monks and laymen, carrying drink for the 
farewell party, accompanied the Jetsun. They crossed a hill and came 
to a small plateau. 
Taking with him flour, rice, a piece of meat, and a cut of butter, 
Milarepa set out alone for the Great Cave of Conquering Demons, 
where he intended to reside. 
On their way home, the six disciples encountered a terrible storm 
on the far side of the mountain, so blinding they could hardly find 
their way. They had to summon all their strength to struggle against 
it, and only reached the village after everyone had retired for the 
night. 
The snow fell for eighteen days and nights, cutting off communication between Drin and Nya Non for six months. All of Milarepa's 
disciples assumed that their Guru must have died in the storm and, 
in his memory, held a sacramental feast. 
In the l\-lonth of Saga (part of March and April], the disciples, 
carrying axes and other tools, went to search for the Jetsun's corpse. 
Just short of their destination, they sat down to take a long rest. In 
the distance they saw a snow-leopard yawning and stretching as it 
climbed up on a big rock. They watched it for a long while, until 
it finally disappeared. They were quite sure they would not find the 
Jetsun's corpse, as they firmly believed the leopard had killed him 
and eaten his body. They murmured, "Is it still possible to obtain 
some remnants of his clothes, or hair?" The very thought of this made 
them cry out in agonized grief. Then they noticed many human footprints beside the leopard's tracks. Afterward, the narrow path where 
the vision of the leopard [or tiger] had appeared became known as 
"The Tiger and Leopard Path." [Having seen this phantasm of the 
leopard], the villagers were very mystified. They thought, "Could this 
be a conjuration of a Deva or ghost?" In bewilderment, they approached the Cave of Conquering Demons, and, hearing Milarepa singing, they asked themselves, "Is it possible that passing hunters have offered food to the Jetsun, or that he has acquired some left-over prey, 
so that he did not die?" 
When they reached the cave, Milarepa chided them: "You laggards, 
you reached the other side of the mountain quite a while ago. Why 
did it take you so long to get here? The food has been prepared for a 
long time and must be cold. Hasten yourselves and enter!" The disciples were overjoyed, and cried and danced happily. Swiftly they rushed 
up to the Jetsun, bowing down before him. Milarepa said, "Now is 
not the time to discuss this; now it is time to eat." But they first made 

--- PAGE 45 ---
The Song of the Snow Ranges 
obeisance to him, greeting him and asking after his health. Then they 
looked round the cave and saw that the flour which they had given 
him earlier was still not used up. A dish of barley, rice, and meat 
stood ready. Dunba Shajaguna exclaimed to the Jetsun, "Indeed, it is 
dinner-time for us, but surely you must have known that we were 
coming." Milarepa replied, "When I was sitting on the rock, I saw you 
all resting on the other side of the pass." "We saw a leopard sitting 
there," said Dunba Shajaguna, "but we did not see you. Where were 
you then?" "I was the leopard," Milarepa answered. "To a yogi who 
has completely mastered Prii.Qa-Mind,2 the essence of the Four Elements is perfectly controlled. He can transform himself into whatever 
bodily form he chooses. I have shown you my occult powers of performing supernormal acts because you are all gifted and advanced 
disciples. However, you should never speak of this to anyone." 
Shindormo said, "Jetsun, your face and body seem to glow with 
even more health than last year. The paths on both sides of the mountain were blocked by snow, and no one could get through to bring 
you food. Were you fed by divinities, or did you find some animal 
killed by wild beasts? What is the secret?" 
Milarepa replied, "Most of the time, I was in the state of Samadhi, 
and hence required no food. On feast days, many J)akinis3 offered 
me food in their Tantric festival gatherings. Occasionally, I ate a 
little dry flour on the tip of a spoon, as I did yesterday and several 
days ago. At the end of the Month of the Horse, I had a vision 
that all of you, my disciples, surrounded me and offered me so much 
to drink and eat that for many days afterward I felt no hunger at 
all. By the way, what were you doing at the end of the Month of the 
Horse?" The disciples counted back and found that it was the date 
on which they had held the sacramental feast for the Jetsun in the 
belief that he had passed away. Milarepa commented, "When worldly 
men make charitable offerings, it is surely helpful to their Bardo' 
state. However, it is still better and more useful to realize the Bardo 
of Here-and-Now."5 
The disciples earnestly besought Milarepa to come down to Nya 
Non, but he refused, saying, "I am enjoying my stay here very much; 
my Samadhi also shows improvement. I want to remain, so return 
without me!" But the disciples countered, "If the honored Jetsun does 
not come down with us this time, the people of Nya Non will blame 
us for leaving him alone to go to his grave. Then abuse and curses 
will be heaped upon us." Wurmo cried, "If you do not come, we 
will either carry you down or sit here until death overtakes us." Milarepa could not resist their insistent appeals and, forced to yield, 
agreed to go with them. 

--- PAGE 46 ---
The disciples then said, "Maybe the Dakinis do not need you, but 
the disciples in your Succession certainly do. Now let us show the 
Dakinis how we can conquer the snow without snowshoes." 
The next morning they all left the cave and set out for Nya Non. 
Shindormo went ahead to bring the villagers the good tidings that the 
Jetsun was still alive and was returning to them. 
[As they neared the village] Milarepa and his disciples came to a 
huge flat rock shaped like a platform, upon which the farmers threshed 
their wheat. By then the news of his arrival had spread. Men and 
women, adults and children, old and young, all flocked to the Jetsun, 
gazing at him, embracing him, crying with great emotion, asking after 
his well-being, greeting him reverently, and making obeisance to him. 
In reply to them, Milarepa, with the snowshoes still on his feet and 
resting his chin on a headstick sang: 
You and 1-patrons, patronesses, and old Milarepa, 
Under the blessed canopy of this auspicious sky, 
Meet once more before our worldly lives 
have passed away. 
I sing in answer to your questions on my welfare. 
Listen closely, and pay heed to my song! 
At the end of the Tiger Year 
· :1 / · 
Before the Rabbit Year began, 
On the sixth day of Wa Jal, 
A sense of renunciation grew within me. 
To the remote Lashi Snow Mountain 
Came Milarepa, the anchorite, who 
clings to solitide. 
It seems that sky and earth agreed; between, 
A wind which tears the skin was sent; 
The rivers ran and torrents surged; 
Black clouds swept in from all directions; 
The sun and moon were shut in darkness; 
And the Twenty-eight Constellations6 
were fixed. 
The Milky Way was pegged, 
And the Eight Planets7 were tied by an 
iron chain. 
The firmament was wrapped in fog; 
In the mist, snow fell for nine days and nights. 
Then more and more for a further eighteen 
nights and days. 

--- PAGE 47 ---
The Song of the Snow Ranges 
The snow fell, big as bags of wool, 
Fell like birds flying in the sky, 
Fell like a whirling swarm of bees. 
Flakes fell small as a spindle's wheel, 
Fell as tiny as bean seed, 
Fell like tufts of cotton. 
The snowfall was beyond all measure. 
Snow covered all the mountain and even 
touched the sky, 
Falling through the bushes and weighing down the trees. 
Black mountains became white, 
All the lakes were frozen. 
Clear water congealed beneath the rocks; 
The world became a flat, white plain; 
Hills and valleys were leveled. 
The snow was such that even evil-doers 
could not venture out.8 
Wild beasts starved and farmyard creatures, too, 
Abandoned by the people in the mountains, 
Pitiful, hungry, and enfeebled. 
In the tree-mists famine struck the birds, 
While rats and mice hid underground. 
In this great disaster I remained in utter 
solitude. 
The falling snow in the year' s-end blizzard 
Fought me, the cotton-clad, high on Snow Mountain, 
I fought it as it fell upon me 
Until it turned to drizzle. 
I conquered the raging windsSubduing them to silent rest. 
The cotton cloth9 I wore was like a burning 
brand. 
The struggle was of life and death, 
As when giants wrestle and sabers clash. 
I, the competent Yogi, was victorious-
! set a model for all Buddhists, 
An example for all great yogis. 
My power over the Vital Heat10 and the 
Two Channels was thus shown. 
--- PAGE 48 ---
By observing carefully the Four llls11 
caused by meditation, 
And keeping to the inward practice, 
The cold and warm Prat:tas became the Essence. 
This was why the raging wind grew tame, 
And the storm, subdued, lost all its power; 
Not even the Devas' army could compete 
With me. This battle I, the Yogi, won. 
A faithful son of Dharma in a tiger skin, 
I have never worn a coat of fox-fur. 
Son of a giant, I have never 
From the wrathful run. 
Son of a lion-of all beasts the king1 have ever lived in the snow mountains. 
To make a task of life is but a joke to me. 
If you believe what this old man tells 
Hearken to his prophecy: 
The teaching of the Practiced Succession12 
will grow and spread afar; 
A few accomplished beings will then appear on earth; 
The fame of Milarepa will spread throughout the world. 
You, disciples, in the memory of man 
Will abound with faith; 
Fame and praise of us 
Will be heard in aftertimes. 
To answer your concern for my health, 
I, the Yogi Milarepa, am very well indeed. 
And how are you, dear patrons? Are you all 
well and happy? 
The Jetsun's happy song so inspired the villagers that they danced 
and sang for joy, and Milarepa, in a merry mood, joined in. The 
great stone platform on which the dance was held became impressed 
with his foot- and hand-prints, as if they had been carved in it. The 
center of the platform sank, forming a small basin with irregular 
steps; thenceforth the platform, formerly called "White-Stepped Rock," 
became known as "Snowshoe Rock." 
Then the villagers escorted Milarepa to the village of Nya Non 
Tsar Ma, and gave service and offerings to him. The patroness Lese-

--- PAGE 49 ---
The Song of the Snow Ranges 
bum said, "Revered One, nothing could give us greater joy than to 
learn that you are alive and have returned safely to our village. Your 
countenance is more radiant than ever, and you are energetic and spirited. Is this because the goddesses made offerings to you when you 
were in solitude?" 
In answer, Milarepa sang: 
I bow down at the feet of my Guru Marpa. 
The gift of blessing is bestowed by the l)akinis; 
The nectar of Samaya13 is abundant nourishment; 
Through faithful devotion the organs of sense are fed. 
Propitious merits are thus garnered by my disciples. 
The immediate l\Iind ha~ no substance; 
It is void, less than a smallest atom. 
When seer and seen are both eliminated, 
The "View" is truly realized. 
As for the "Practice" -in the Stream of Illumination, 
No stages can be found. 
Perseverence in Practice is confirmed 
When actor and acting are both annulled. 
In the Realm of Illumination, 
Where subject and object are one, 
I see no cause, for all is Void. 
When acting and actor disappear, 
All actions become correct. 
The finite thoughts14 dissolve in Dharmadhatu; 
The Eight Worldly Winds bring neither hope nor fear. 
When the precept and the precept-keeper disappear, 
The disciplines are best observed. 
By-knowing that the Self-mind is Dharmakaya15 -
Buddha's Body absoluteBy an earnest, altruistic vow, 
The deed and doer disappear. 
Thus the glorious Dharma triumphs. 
In answer to his disciples' questioning, 
This is the happy song the old man sings! 

--- PAGE 50 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
The falling snow enclosed 
My house of meditation;16 
Goddesses gave me food and sustenance; 
The water of Snow Mountain was the purest draught. 
All was done without effort; 
There is no need to farm whert there's no 
demand [for food]. 
My store is full without preparation or hoarding. 
By observing my own mind, all things are seen; 
By sitting in a lowly place, the royal throne 
is reached. 
Perfection is attained through the Guru's grace; 
This bounty is repaid by Dharma practice. 
Followers and patrons here assembled, 
Give your services with faith. 
Be happy, all, and gay. 
Dunbar Shajaguna made obeisance to Milarepa, saying, "It is indeed 
wondrous and pleasing to learn that so much snow did not harm the 
Jetsun, and that \Ve, your disciples, were able to return with you safely 
to the village. What a joy that all the disciples could see their Guru! 
We will be deeply grateful and happy if you preach the Dharma on 
your meditative experiences this winter, as an arrival-gift to us." 
Milarepa, in answer to Shajaguna's request and as an arrival-gift to 
the disciples of Nya Non, sang the song of "The Six Essences of Meditative Experience": 
Obeisance to my Guru with the Three Perfections. 
This evening, at the request 
Of my disciples Shajaguna and the Patron Dormos, 
I, Milarepa, tell what I experienced when meditating, 
I who ever dwell in the remote fastnesses. 
The pure vow made this congregation possible; 
The pure precept of Dharma united me and my patrons. 
My sons! What you have asked, will I, 
The father, present as my arrival-gift. 
I renounce the world, and have lamented for it. 
I, Milarepa, came to Lashi Snow Mountain 
To occupy alone the Cave of Conquering Demons. 

--- PAGE 51 ---
The Song of the Snow Ranges 
For six full months, the experiences of meditation 
grew; 
I now disclose them in this, the song of the 
Six Essences. 
First come the Six Parables of Outer Appearance; 
Second, the Six Inner Misconducts, 
Which one should carefully consider; 
Third, the Six Ropes which bind us in Saf!lsara; 
Fourth, the Six Ways through which Liberation 
is achieved; 
Fifth, the Six Essences of Knowledge 
Through which one attains confidence; 
Sixth, the Six Blissful Experiences of Meditation. 
If one docs not commit this song to memory, 
No impression is left upon the mind. 
Heed carefully, then, my explanations. 
If there be obstacles, 
It cannot be called space; 
If there be numbers, 
It cannot be called stars. 
One cannot say "This is a mountain," 
If it moves and shakes. 
It cannot be an ocean 
Should it grow or shrink. 
One cannot be called a swimmer 
If he needs a bridge. 
It is not a rain bow 
If it can be grasped. 
These are the Six Outer Parables. 
The limits of the definite 
Limit understanding. 
Drowsiness and distractions 
Are not meditation. 
Acceptance and rejection 
Are not acts of will. 
A constant flow of thought 
Is not Yoga. 
If there be East and W est,tT 
It is not Wisdom; 
--- PAGE 52 ---
If birth and death, 
It is not Buddha. 
These are the Six Inner Faults. 
Denizens of Hell are bound by hate, 
Hungry ghosts by misery, 
And beasts by blindness. 
Men by lust are bound, 
By jealousy, Asuras, 
And Devas in Heaven by pride. 
These Six Fetters are the Obstacles to Liberation. 
Great faith, reliance 
On a wise and strict Guru, 
Good discipline, 
Solitude in a hermitage, 
Determined, persevering 
Practice, and meditationThese are the Six \Vays that lead to Liberation. 
The Original Inborn Wisdom18 is 
The sphere of primordial [depth]. 
Without "exterior" or "interior" is the sphere 
of Awareness; 
Without brightness or darkness is the sphere 
of Insight; 
Omnipresent and all-embracing is the sphere 
of Dharma; 
Without mutation or transition is the sphere 
of Tig Le;10 
Without interruption is the sphere of Experience.20 
These are the Six Unshakable Realms of Essence. 
Bliss rises when the Vital Heat is fanned, 
When air from the NaQis21 flows in the 
Central Channel, 
When the Bodhi-Mind22 flows from above, 
When it is purified below, 
When white and red meet in the middle, 
And the joy of leakless body satiates one, 
These are the Six Blissful Experiences of Yoga. 
To please you, my sons and followers, 
I sing this song of the Six Essences, 

--- PAGE 53 ---
The Song of the Snow Ranges 
Of my experiences last winter when meditating. 
May all at this delightful meeting 
Drink the heavenly nectar of my song. 
May everyone be gay and full of joy. 
May your pure wishes be fulfilled. 
This is the silly song sung by this old man; 
Do not belittle it, this gift of Dharma, 
But with joyous hearts stride forward 
On the Path of the Blessed Doctrine! 
Shindormo cried, "Jetsun! Most Precious One! You are like unto 
the Buddhas of the past, present, and future. The opportunity to serve 
yo)J and to learn from you is a rare privilege. Those who do not have 
faith in you are indeed more foolish than the animals." 
l\1ilarepa replied, "It may not be so very important for a person 
to have faith in me. It does not matter much either way. But if you 
have a precious human body and have been born at a time and place 
in which the Buddhist religion prevails, it is very foolish indeed not 
to practice the Dharma." Milarepa thus sang: 
At the feet of the Translator Marpa, I 
prostrate myself, 
And sing to you, my faithful patrons. 
How stupid it is to sin with recklessness 
While the pure Dharma spreads all about you. 
How foolish to spend your lifetime without meaning, 
When a precious human body is so rare a gift. 
How ridiculous to cling to prison-like 
cities and remain there. 
How laughable to fight and quarrel with your 
wives and relatives, 
Who do but visit you. 
How senseless to cherish sweet and tender words 
Which are but empty echoes in a dream. 
How silly to disregard one's life by fighting foes 
Who are but frail flowers. 
How foolish it is when dying to torment 
oneself with thoughts of family, 
Which bind one to Maya's 2~ mansion. 
How stupid to stint on property and money, 

--- PAGE 54 ---
Which are a debt on loan from others. 
How ridiculous it is to beautify and deck the body, 
Which is a vessel full of filth. 
How silly to strain each nerve for wealth and goods, 
And neglect the nectar of the inner teachings! 
In a crowd of fools, the clever and sensible 
Should practice the Dharma, as do I. 
The people in the assembly said to Milarepa, "We are deeply grateful for your songs of wisdom. But we can never emulate your industry and intelligence. We can only try to avoid the foolish things you 
have cited. Our only wish is for the privilege of your continued presence, that the living may give their service and obtain instruction 
from you, and that the dead, too, may be saved through your grace." 
Milarepa replied, "In obedience to the order of my Guru, I have 
been meditating on Lashi Snow Mountain. I may stay here for a time, 
but I can never stay here as you worldly people do. Disrespect, and 
not goodwill, would result if I were to remain among you. He then 
sang: 
Obeisance to Marpa the Translator. 
May all my patrons and patronesses here assembled 
Have immutable faith, and pray to me with 
sincerity unfeigned. 
If one stays too long with friends, 
They will soon tire of him; 
Living in such closeness leads to dislike and hate. 
It is but human to expect and demand too much 
When one dwells too long in companionship. 
The belligerence in human nature leads to 
broken precepts; 
Bad company destroys good deeds; 
Honest words bring evil when spoken in a crowd; 
To argue the right and wrong only makes more foes. 
To cling to sectarian bigotry and dogma 
Makes one vicious and more sinful. 
An obligatory response to the offerings of 
the faithful ever causes evil thoughts. 

--- PAGE 55 ---
The Song of the Snow Ranges 
To enjoy the Food of the Dead24 is sinful 
and dangerous. 
' 
The offerings of worldly beings are low and worthless. 
Companionship itself causes contempt; 
From contempt hate and aversion grow. 
The more houses one owns, the more one 
suffers at the time of death. 
These sufferings and lamentations are indeed 
intolerable, 
Especially to yogis who dwell in solitude. 
1, Milarepa, am going to a quiet hermitage, 
to live alone. 
Faithful patrons, your endeavor to amass 
merits is wonderful; 
My patrons and patronesses, it is good 
To make offerings and to serve your Guru. 
I confirm my wish to meet you soon, 
And see you many times. 
The patrons all said to Milarepa, "We never tire of hearing your 
instruction and preaching; it may be that you have tired of us. No matter how warmly we entreat you to remain here, we know it will be in 
vain. We only hope that from time to time you will come to visit 
us from Lashi." 
The villagers then offered Milarepa many provisions and other goods, 
but he did not take them. All the people were inspired with veneration and paid him deep respect. In a mood of great delight and happiness, the villagers strongly confirmed their unshakable faith in the 
Jetsun. 
This is the Song of the Snow Ranges. 
NOTES 
I Dunba (T.T.: sTon.Pa.): a high priest who is versed in Buddhist scriptures 
and proficient in giving spiritual instructions to Buddhist followers. 
2 Pral_la-Mind: According to Tantric teaching, mind and Pral_la manifest as 

--- PAGE 56 ---
two aspects of a unity. Mind is that which is aware; Prit;~a is the active energy which 
gives support to the awareness. He who masters the mind automatically masters 
the Prat;~a, and vice versa. The aim of any system of meditation is to control or mas· 
ter the Prat;~a·Mind. An accomplished yogi is one who has mastered his Prat;~a·Mind. 
3 See story l, Note 19. 
4 Bardo (T.T.: Bar.Do.): the intermediate state of existence between death 
and rebirth. According to Tibetan Buddhism, this very important state is like a 
crossroad, the fate and fortune of one's rebirth depending much upon it. 
5 The Bardo of Here·and·Now: From the viewpoint of Tantric teachings, the 
state of Bardo is not confined to the state after death. This very life itself is a state 
of Bardo. The person in physical existence, as we know it, goes through the same 
experiences as in Bardo, only in more "substantial fashion." To a Bardo·dweller, it 
is the person in physical existence who seems to be in Bardo, whereas the two states 
of life and death are actually correlative and similar. 
6 The Twenty·eight Constellations (T.T.: rCyu.sKar.Ner.brCyad.; lit.: the 
twenty-eight running stars): They are the constellations through which the moon 
passes in her revolution round the heavens. 
7 The Eight Planets (T.T.: gZah.brCyad.) refer to the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, and Rahu (see Story 4, Note 1). 
8 The snowfall is sometimes so heavy in Tibet that all activity. stops. Thus, 
even if one wants to do evil things, one is prevented. 
9 Cotton cloth: The Tantric yogi who practices Heat Yoga is not supposed to 
wear furs -
he wears only simple cotton clothing even in a cold country like 
Tibet. 
10 Vital Heat, Dumo (T.T.: gTum.Mo.): the "mystic" heat produced from 
the Navel Center in Tantric meditations. It is one of the most important practices 
of Tibetan Tantrism. See "The Six Yogas of Naropa," in Evans-Wentz' "Tibetan 
Yoga and Secret Doctrines," 2nd ed., Oxford University Press, 1958. See also the 
translator's "Teachings of Tibetan Yoga." 
11 The Four Ills: the sicknesses that are caused by the unbalancing strength 
and activity of the Four Elements- earth, water, fire, and air- in the yogi's body. 
12 The Practiced Succession (T.T.: sGrub.brCyud.): another name for Ghagyuba, the School of Marpa and Milarepa. The reason for this nomenclature is due 
to the spirit and tradition of this School which emphasizes Yoga practice and actual 
experience, rather than scholastic investigation. This tradition differs sharply from 
the traditions of the Yellow (Gelugba) and Gray (Sajyaba) Schools of Tibet. 
13 Nectar of Samaya: Samaya implies the Tantric precepts. He who observes 
these precepts receives grace and blessings, a necessary nourishment for spiritual 
growth. 
14 This can also be rendered as: "thoughts of a limitative pattern" (T.T.: 
Phyogs.Chahi.rTog.Pa.). The patterns of thought of sentient beings are of a limited 
or finite nature. When one realizes the truth of Voidness (Siinyata), the limitative patterns of thought are fundamentally transformed. Using Buddhist terminology, they "dissolve" into the Dharmadhatu- the absolute, universal, and interpenetrating state of all the different aspects of existence in the light of the Void. 
15 Dharmakaya: the "Body of Truth," which is ultimate, formless, omnipresent, and yet without any attributes. 
16 When a yogi is preparing to meditate over a long period, he will mark lines 
on the ground around his dwelling, outside of which he will not go. In this case Milarepa did not have to make any marks, as the snow itself was deep and heavy 
enough to confine him. 

--- PAGE 57 ---
The Song of the Snow Ranges 
17 East and \Vest: If the very idea of direction still exists, then there is no 
\Visdom, because direction implies a limitation and differentiation, while Wisdom 
transcends both. 
18 T.T.: 1IIan.Cig.sKycs.Pahi.Ye.<;:es. This term is translated in this book as 
the Original Inborn \Visdom, or as Innate, or Inborn \Visdom. lts literal translation 
should perhaps be the Coemergent, or Simultaneously Born \Visdom, implying that 
it is within one at all times. However, for convenience sake, Innate, or Inborn Wis· 
dom is used. 
19 Tig Le (T.T.: Thig.Le.; Skt.: Bindu): This term has many meanings, such 
as "the dot," "the solid one," "the essence," etc. It is also used to signify male semen 
or female "blood," which represent the Life-Essence of physical bodies. Here Tig 
Le implies the essence or immutability of Absolute Truth. 
20 Sphere of Experience: The yogi, in all activities of daily life, whether walk· 
ing, eating, sleeping, talking, or the like, never loses the feeling or "sensation," of 
his yogic experience. 
21 The l\'ac;lis (Roma and Junma): the mystical left and right Channels (see 
Story 1, Note 28). 
22 Bodhi-Mind (or Bodhi-Heart) here means Tig Le. 
23 Maya means delusion or illusion. The phenomenal world is considered by 
Buddhism to be a dream, a phantasm, a magic shadow play, a reflection- in short 
it has only an illusory existence and not a real one. 
24 Food of the Dead: The Tibetan Lamas believe that to accept offerings 
from relatives of the deceased person on his behalf incurs a great responsibility. Once 
the "Food of the Dead" is taken, the Lama is responsible for liberating the "soul" 
from sufferings and dangers. Therefore, in Tibet, to receive the offering for the 
dead is considered a very serious matter. 

--- PAGE 58 ---
CHALLENGE FROM 
A WISE DEMONESS 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O NCE Milarepa stayed in Nya Non [for a short period]. The people 
there besought him to remain but he would not consent, and, in 
compliance with his Guru's order, went to Riwo Balnbar and practiced meditation in a cave near Linba. To the right of his seat there 
was a cleft in the rock. Late one night, Milarepa heard a cracking 
sound from the crevice. He got up from his seat and looked around. 
But as he saw nothing, he thought it must be an illusion, and so returned to his bed-seat. Suddenly, a great beam of light shone out from 
the crevice. In the midst of the light appeared a red man on a black 
deer led by a beautiful woman. The man gave Milarepa a blow with 
his elbow accompanied by a suffocating wind, and then disappared. 
The woman became a red bitch, who immediately caught Milarepa 
by the foot. Milarepa realized that this was an apparition conjured by 
(the she-demon] Draug Srin Mo, so he sang the following song to her: 
I make obeisance to Marpa, the gracious one. 
You, malignant Draug Srin Mo of Linba Draug, 
you sinful female ghost 
Appearing in a vicious conjured form, 
In your contempt you come looking for a 
chance [to harm me]. 
I do not deceive in tuneful song: 
·I sing only honest words and truth. 
In the midst of the blue sky, 
The blessing of moon and sun brings affluence. 
--- PAGE 59 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
From the marvelous Palace of Heaven 
shines the ray of light 
By which all sentient beings are illumined and seen. 
[I pray] the planet Chamju1 will not rival 
The sun and moon as they circle the Four 
Continents.2 
In the Eastern Quarter, on the top of Snow Mountain, 
Darsen Gharmo, the snow lioness, brings prosperity; 
She is the queen of beasts, 
And never eats spoiled meat. 
When she appears on the horizon 
Do not affiict her with a storm! 
In the South, amid the forest trees, 
The mountain tigress, Dagmo Ridra, brings prosperity; 
She is the champion of all wild beasts, 
gallant and invincible. 
When she walks on a narrow and dangerous path, 
Do not ambush her in a hunter's trap! 
In the West, in the Ma Pam ocean, blue and vast, 
The Dogar Nya [White-bellied Fish] brings 
prosperity; 
She is the supreme dancer of the water-element, 
In a marvelous way she rolls her eyes. 
When she seeks delicious food, 
Do not harm her with a fish-hook! 
In the North, above the wide Red Rock, 
Shajageubo, the great vulture brings prosperity; 
She is the queen of birds. 
\Vondrous indeed, she never takes the 
lives of others. 
When she seeks food on the top of the 
three mountains, 
Do not trap her in a net! 
In the cave of Linba where the vultures live, 
I, l\lilarepa, bring prosperity. 
I aim at my own and others' welfare, 
Renouncing a worldly life. 
\Vith an enlightened mind,3 
--- PAGE 60 ---
I strive for Buddhahood in one lifetime. 
Diligent and undistracted I practice Dharma. 
Draug Srin Mo, pray do not afflict me! 
Pray hearken to this song with five 
parables and six meanings, 
The song with rhythm, the song like a golden string. 
Pitiable Draug Srin Mo! Do you understand me? 
To commit evil Karma is a heavy sin. 
Should you not take heed of this sinful Karma? 
Should you not control your harmful thoughts 
and vicious heart? 
If you do not realize that all things are 
merely of the mind, 
The endless apparitions of Nhamdog4 will 
never cease. 
If one realizes not that the Mind-Essence is void, 
How can one dispel the spirit of evil? 
You sinful demon hag! Do not afflict me! 
Harm me not, and retum to your own abode! 
Instantaneously sl1e disappeared. However, still holding his foot, she 
replied to Milarepa: 
Oh, you gifted son of the Dharma, 
The one alone who has courage and fortitude, 
The yogi who treads the Path of the Cemetery,5 
The saintly Buddhist who follows the ascetic way, 
Your song is the Buddha's teaching, 
More precious than gold. 
To exchange gold for brass is shameful. 
Should I not atone for the sins I have committed, 
All that I have ever said will be a lie. 
For an answer to the Song of Karma 
Which you have just sung to me, 
Hearken closely to my allegories. 
In the midst of the blue sky, 
Shines the light of sun and moon 
Through which prosperity to earth is brought. 
As you have just said, 

--- PAGE 61 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
Rays from the Measureless Palace6 of the Gods 
Dispel the darkness in the Four Continents, 
While moon and sun circle the Islands Four, 
With ease they give out beams of light; 
Were they not dazzled by their glowing rays, 
How could Rahu affiict7 them? 
In the East, where towers the crystal snow mountain, 
Darsen Charmo brings prosperity; 
She is the queen of beasts; 
She commands them as her servants. 
When she appeared on the horizon, 
The hurricanes and storms would not have 
afflicted her 
Had she not become too proud and arrogant. 
In the South, amid the dense forest trees, 
The mountain tigress brings prosperity; 
Champion is she of all the beasts. 
With pride she boasts of conquests with her claws; 
When she comes close to a narrow and dangerous path, 
She shows off her pride with great hauteur. 
Were she not flaunting her delusive stripes 
and smiles, 
The hunter's trap would never catch her. 
In the Western Quarter, in the depth of the 
blue ocean, 
The White-bellied Fish brings prosperity; 
She is the dancer in the water element. 
She claims to be the seer of great gods. 
Because of her gluttony, she searches for 
delicious food. 
Had she not used her illusive body 
To search for human food, 
How could the fish-hook harm her? 
In the North, above the wide Red Rock, 
The vulture, queen of birds, brings prosperity. 
She is the Deva8 of birds, who dwells among 
the trees. 
She proudly claims that she disposes of all the birds. 
When she searches for blood and flesh to eat, 
--- PAGE 62 ---
She flies over the three mountains. 
If she swooped not at her prey, 
How could the bird net catch her? 
In the vulture-dwelling Rock, you, 
Milarepa, bring prosperity. 
You claim that you are doing good, both 
for yourself and others." 
With the flowering of the perfect Bodhi-Heart, 
attentively you meditate; 
Your ambition is, in one life, to become Buddha. 
Your hope is to save sentient beings in the 
Six Realms.10 
When you were engrossed in the practice of 
meditation, 
The powerful force of your habitual-thoughts 
arose,11 
It stirred your Self-mind and aroused delusory 
discriminations. 
If in your mind the discriminating thought, 
"Enemy," had ne'er arisen, 
How could I, Draug Srin Mo, afflict you? 
You should know that from one's mind alone 
Comes the evil of habitual-thinking. 
What is the use of my following your guidance 
If you have not realized the Mind of Suchness?12 
You had better go your own way, while I go mine. 
He who does not realize the mind's voidness, 
Can never be exempted from the influence of evil. 
If one knows the Self-mind by oneself, 
All obstacles and difficulties become one's aids. 
Even I, Draug Srin Mo, will then gladly be 
his servant. 
You, Milarepa, still have wrong ideas, 
You have yet to pierce into the Self-mind's nature, 
You have yet to penetrate to illusion's root. 
When Draug Srin Mo finished her singing, Milarepa was much impressed with her cleverness. lie appeared to be very pleased [and 
somewhat surprised] to hear such expressions from a demoness, and, 
in answer to her, replied with a song, "The Eight Parables of Thinking": 

--- PAGE 63 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
Yes! Yes! What you have said is true, true indeed. 
Oh! You vicious Draug Srin Mo, 
It is hard to find words truer than these. 
Although I have traveled far and wide, 
Never have I heard a song so beautiful. 
Even should one hundred great scholars assemble here, 
No better illustration could they give. 
You, a specter, have sung good words; 
They are like a rod of gold, 
Which strikes into my very heart. 
Thus the Heart-air, ta the Dharma-clinging14 
are dispelled; 
The darkness of my ignorant blindness is 
thus illumined; 
The white lotus of wisdom blossoms thus; 
The lamp which brightens self-awareness15 
is lit; 
And mindfulness of awareness is fully liberated. 
[In observing that] this mindfulness is liberated 
I stare upward at the great blue sky, 
I realize completely the empty nature of being; 
Of palpable existence, 
No anxiety or fear have I. 
When I look at the sun and moon 
I realize their nakedness, the radiance of 
Mind-Essence; 
Of distraction and drowsiness, 18 no fear have I. 
When I gaze at the top of the mountains, 
I clearly realize the immutable Samadhi; 
Of change and flow I have no fear. 
When I look down at the flowing river, 
I fully realize the running nature of all flux; 
Of the wrong view of Non-cause, I have no 
fear or misgiving. 
When I contemplate the rainbow-like [illusions 
of existence] 
I clearly realize the identity of Form and 
Voidness; 
--- PAGE 64 ---
Of the nihilistic and realistic wrong-views17 
I have no fear. 
When I see the shadows and the moon-in-water, 
I fully realize the self-radiance of Non-clinging; 
Of subjective and objective thoughts,18 
I have no fear. 
When I look inwardly to the self-aware mind, 
I clearly see the light of the inner lamp; 
Of ignorant blindness, I have no fear. 
When I hear what you, sinful spirit, have sung, 
I fully realize the nature of self-awareness; 
Of the obstacles and difficulties, I have no fear. 
You, specter, are indeed eloquent in speech! 
Do you really understand the nature of mind 
as you have said? 
Look at the ugly birth of a hag-specter which 
you have merited! 
You do nothing but vicious and evil deeds. 
This is caused by your Dharma-ignorance and 
disregard of morality. 
You should heed more diligently 
The evils and sufferings of SaJTlsiira. 
You should thoroughly renounce the Ten 
Evil ActionsJ19 
A yogi, lion-like, I have neither fear nor panic. 
You, sinful demon, should not think my 
joking words are true.20 
I was only making fun of you. 
Oh spirit! You have mocked me this evening! 
But may we follow the legend of the Buddha 
and the Five Demons,21 
And may the perfect Bodhi-Mind arise in you! 
With yonr pure vow, combined with my compassion, 
May you become one of my disciples in the 
future life. 
Moved by his reply, a full faith in the Jetsun blossomed in Draug 
Srin Mo's heart. She released Milarepa's foot and sang with a sweet 
voice: 

--- PAGE 65 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demo ness 
It is by virtue of the stock of Merits22 
That you, oh gifted Yogi, 
Are able to practice the Dharma 
And remain alone within this mounta!n solitude! 
Your merciful eyes keep watch o'er all beings 
in compassion! 
I follow the Lineage of Bedma Tutrin23 
And have heard the rosary of precious 
words in the holy Dharma. 
Though I have listened to much preaching, 
And attended great congregations, 
Still my craving and clinging are excessive. 
I lead to goodness those who observe the Dharma; 
I show the right Path to gifted Buddhists. 
Although my intention is friendly and my 
motive good, 
Food must be sought to support this depraved body. 
I roam the earth in this evil form, 
Desiring blood and flesh for food. 
I enter into the soul of whomsoever I encounter; 
I incite the hearts of maidens, pretty and 
charming; 
I madden with lust the blood of young men, 
strong and handsome. 
With my eyes, I amuse myself watching all 
the dramas; 
With my mind, I instigate cravings in all nations; 
With my body I incite people to excitement 
and restlessness. 
My home is at Linba, 
My residence is in the Rock. 
These are the things I do, 
This is my sincere reply and honest 
self-confession. 
These are the words of greeting for our meeting, 
--- PAGE 66 ---
This is the evidence of my faith in you, 
and of my offerings. 
Singing this song of honesty, 
Let us be inspired and happy. 
Milarepa thought, "This demon's earnest inquiry must be well answered, and her pride subdued." He then sang: 
Hearken, hearken closely, you depraved hag. 
The Guru is good, but the disciple is bad. 
Those who have only heard and read the 
teaching of the Dharma, 
Merely grasp at words. 
They do not understand the real Dharma. 
Eloquent and convincing as their words may sound, 
There is neither use nor value in them. 
Deceitful sayings and empty talk help not 
In cleansing the defilements of one's mind. 
Because of your evil habit-propensities 
formed in the past, 
And your vicious doings in the present, 
You have violated the Precepts and your Vows.24 
By force of these transgressions, 
You were born as a lower form of woman. 
Your body wanders in the wretched haunts 
of cannibals; 
Your talk is self-cheating and deceiving; 
Your mind is saturated with thoughts of 
afflicting others. 
It was because of your disregard of the 
Law of Karma, 
That an ugly body in an inferior birth was taken, 
Should you think now upon the vices of Sarpsara, 
You would confess your guilt, and promise to 
do good. 
Like a lion, I do not fear; 
Like an elephant, I have no anxiety; 
Like a madman, I have no pretension and no hope. 
I tell you the honest truth. 

--- PAGE 67 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
To make trouble and afflict me 
Will only bring more sorrow on yourself. 
Make a vow toward the pure Dharma. 
Make a wish to be my disciple in the future. 
Oh, you confused, depraved hag, 
Think on these words with care! 
Draug Srin Mo now appeared visibly as before, and with honesty 
she sang: 
Of the Holy Buddhas of the Three Times,25 
The Buddha Vajradhara is the chief; 
He also is the Lord of the wondrous Doctrine. 
The arising of Bodhi-Mind is indeed remarkable. 
You may call me a depraved hag, but I do 
have great l\Ierits. 
True understanding arose when I heard your 
warning. 
At first I swore to obey my Guru's instructions, 
I studied and learned the holy Dharma. 
But then I indulged myself, committing evil deeds. 
With vicious passions26 burning wildly, 
unbearably in my heart, 
I was born in the ugly form of a she-demon. 
I meant to help all sentient beings, 
But again and again the results were evil. 
You came, great Yogi, at the beginning of last year; 
Staying alone in the cave, you meditated in 
solitude. 
Sometimes I like you, but sometimes I do not! 
It is because I like you that I came tonight; 
It is because I do not, that I seized your foot. 
I now repent this evil deed. 
Hereafter, this wretched hag will renounce 
her wrong-doings; 
With all her heart she will practice the Dharma; 
She will serve Buddhism as best she can. 
From now on, with the cool shade of the 
tree of grace, 

--- PAGE 68 ---
Please protect her from the Five Poisonous 
Cravings.27 
I, the depraved woman with ugly form, 
take refuge in you, 
And rely on the instructions you have given. 
I herewith renounce my malicious intentions. 
From now until the time I achieve Buddhahood, 
I swear to protect the yogis, and befriend 
.all who meditate. 
I will serve and assist the followers 
Of the Doctrine, the observers of the Precepts. 
To advanced yogis and the Dharma, I shall be 
an honest servant. 
Thereupon, Draug Srin Mo swore before Milarepa that in the future 
she would never harm anyone. She also took an oath to protect all 
who meditate. In order to guide Draug Srin Mo. Milarepa then sang: 
I am the venerable one who has renounced Sarpsara; 
I am the noble son of my Guru; 
In me are stored the precious teachings; 
A Buddhist with great sincerity and devotion am I. 
I am the yogi who perceives the essence of being; 
I am like a mother to all sentient beings; 
I am a man who has courage and perseverance, 
The holder of the spirit of Gautama Buddha, 
The master of the Heart-aspiring-to-Bodhi. 
I am the one who always adheres to kindness; 
With great compassion I have subdued all 
evil thoughts. 
I am the one who stays in the cave of Linba, 
Who practices meditation without distraction. 
Do you think you are happy now? You confused, 
wretched hag! 
If you have not found happiness, it is your 
own fault. 
Beware! Your clinging-to-Ego2 ~ is greater 
than yourself; 

--- PAGE 69 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
Pay heed! Your emotions are stronger 
than yourself. 
Oh, specter, your vicious will is far 
wickeder than yourself; 
Your habitual-thought is more characteristic 
than yourself; 
Your ceaseless mental activity29 is more 
frantic than yourself! 
To maintain the existence of a ghost, 
Only brings about mischief; 
To understand the non-existence of a ghost 
Is the way of Buddha; 
To know that ghost and Reality are one 
Is the way to Liberation. 
Knowing that the ghosts are all one's parents 
Is the right understanding; 
Realizing that the ghost itself is Self-mind 
Is glory supreme. 
You will be emancipated from all fetters 
If you realize the truth that I have stated; 
This is my instruction to you, demoness! 
To become my disciple you must observe the 
precepts. 
Violate not the rules of Vajrayana,30 
Debase not the great Compassion, 
Afflict not the body, word, and mind of Buddhists. 
If you ever violate these rules. 
You can be assured of plummeting to 
the Vajra Hell! 31 
Recite these important rules three times; 
Remember their meaning and practice them. 
Let us now make a wish, and may the boon 
come quickly to you! 
With the peerless Bodhi-Heart, inconceivably 
great, may you have great happiness. 
In your future life, 
May you then become my chief disciple, 
Oh, woman of Dorje Semba.32 
--- PAGE 70 ---
After Draug Srin Mo had taken the oath before the Jetsun, she 
made obeisances to him and also circumambulated him many times. 
She swore that thereafter she would obey all his orders. Then she 
disappeared like a rainbow, vanishing into the sky. 
In the meantime, the day was dawning, and the sun shone. After a 
while Draug Srin Mo returned, bringing with her brothers, sisters, 
and a retinue, all with handsome faces and dressed in their best, to 
see the Jetsun. They made many offerings to him. 
Draug Srin Mo said to Milarepa, "I am a sinful ghost. Forced by 
evil Karma, I was caught in a low form of birth; driven by evil habitual-thoughts, I influenced others, also, to become evil. I pray you to 
forgive me. Evil intention made me do you mischief. I entreat you 
to forgive me for what I have done. Hereafter I will obey your orders 
strictly and try to be your honest servant. Be gracious, and tell us of 
the supreme Truth that you have realized." In making this request 
Draug Srin Mo sang: 
Oh, thou! Thou (great one]! The son of 
great heroes! 
Having amassed numerous merits, 
You have become a gifted person; 
Belonging to a distinguished Succession,83 
You are endowed with Waves of Grace.3' 
You are the one who meditates with great perseverance, 
Who with endurance stays alone, 
\Vho industriously practices the deep teachings. 
To you there are no devils and no obstacles! 
Through realizing the microcosm of the 
inner Channels and PraQas, 
You can work great miracles. 
We and you are in harmonious relationship. 
Our pure wishes in previous lives brought 
about our meeting. 
Though I have met numerous accomplished saints, 
Only through you have I received grace and guidance. 
I, a hag-specter, speak with sincerity! 
The expedient truth of Hinayana35 may 
be illusive; 

--- PAGE 71 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
It is indeed hard to subdue the passions 
due to Karma! 
One may talk eloquently about the Dharma, 
But talk is of no avail when suffering 
and misery come. 
That kind of Guru who strays from the Dharma, 
Will not help himself, and merely incurs hatred. 
You! The Incarnation Body of Buddha36 
in the Three Times, 
Realize the immutable truth of Dharmata.37 
With the inner teaching, you practice the 
quintessence of Dharma. 
In this blessed place where grew the Ultimate 
Enlightenment, 
\\'e, Draug Srin Mo and her retinue, 
Pray you to elucidate for us the teaching 
of the Innermost Secret. 
Pray! Grant us the secret words of Vajrayiina, 
the truth of the Ultimate; 
Pray! Teach us the great illuminating Wisdom, 
Pray! Grant us the radiance of the Light! 
By hearing the immutable Truth, the profound 
Secret Doctrine, 
One will not fall into the lower path. 
By practicing the teaching of the Secret Doctrine, 
One will not wander in Saq1sara's paths. 
Without hiding and concealment, 
We pray you to unfold to us the Truth complete. 
Milarepa then said, "From what I can see now, not all of you 
are able to practice the highest teaching of the immutable Truth. If 
you insist on learning the Inner Teaching you must swear with your 
life and pledge a solemn oath." 
Thereupon, Draug Srin Mo swore an oath that henceforth she would 
follow all the orders of the Jetsun, and that she would serve and assist all Buddhists. In answer to her questions, Milarepa sang a song, 
"The Immutable and Real Dharma on the Twenty-seven Vanishmcnts": 
To the secret Buddha with a human body, 
To the incomprable Translator, Marpa, 
my father Guru, 

--- PAGE 72 ---
At your feet I bow, oh Gracious One! 
I am not a singer who wishes to display his art, 
But you, specter, entreat me to sing and sing again. 
Today I will sing to you of the Ultimate Truth. 
Thunder, lightning, and the douds, 
Arising as they do out of the sky, 
Vanish and recede back into it. 
The rainbow, fog, and mist, 
Arising as they do from the fi~mament, 
Vanish and recede back into it. 
Honey, fruit, and crops grow out of the earth; 
All vanish and recede back into it. 
Flowers, leaves, and forests, 
Arising as they do out of the earth, 
Vanish and return back into it once more. 
The ripple, tide, and flux, 
Arising as they do from the great ocean, 
Also vanish and into it return. 
Habitual-thinking, dingings, and desires, 
Arising as they do from the Alaya Consciousness,38 
All vanish and return to the Alaya. 
Self-awareness, self-illumination, and self-liberation, 
Arising as they do from the Mind-Essence, 
All vanish and dissolve back into the mind. 
Non-arising, Non-extinction, and Non-description, 
Arise from the Dharmata 
And all return to it again. 
Phantasms, hallucinations, and visions of demons, 
All are produced from Yoga, 
And all go back and vanish into it again. 
Should one cling to the reality of visions,311 
He would be confused in his meditation. 

--- PAGE 73 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demoness 
If he knew not that all obstacles 
Reveal the Void, the manifestation of Mind, 
He would be misled in his meditation. 
The very root of all confusion 
Also comes out of the mind. 
He who realizes the nature of that mind, 
Sees the great Illumination without coming 
and going. 
Observing the nature of all outer forms, 
He realizes that they are but illusory visions 
of mind. 
He sees also the identity of the Void and Form. 
Moreover, to meditate is an illusory thought; 
Not to meditate is illusory, too. 
It is the same whether or not you meditate. 
Discrimination of "the two"40 is the 
source of all wrong views. 
From the ultimate viewpoint there is no 
view whatsoever. 
This is the nature41 of Mind. 
The teaching of observation of 
The Dharma-nature is illustrated through 
the simile of space. 
You, Draug Srin Mo, should look into the 
meaning of beyond-thoughts; 
You should enter the non-distracted realm 
in meditation; 
You should act naturally and spontaneously, 
Ever conscious of the Essence. 
Beyond words is the Accomplishment, free 
from hope and fear. 
I have no time to sing for fun, chatting with 
empty words. 
Oh, spirit! Think of the auspicious Dharma. 
Ask little, do not raise so many questions; 
But be relaxed and sit at ease! 
I sing as you requested; 
These are my mad words.42 
If you can practice them, 
--- PAGE 74 ---
You will eat the food of Great Bliss43 
when hungry, 
And drink the Nectar44 when thirsty. 
Then you can help yogis by your actions. 
Whereupon Draug Srin Mo and her retinue were overwhelmed with 
devotion for the Jetsun, making obeisances and circumambulating him 
many times. They cried, "Revered One, we are indeed deeply grateful 
to you!" and disappeared like a rainbow, vanishing into the sky. 
From then on, they obeyed the orders of Milarepa; they served yogis, 
never afflicting them, and became their good friends. 
This is the story of [Milarepa's meeting with] Draug Srin Mo at 
the cave of Linba. 
NOTES 
1 The Planet Chamju (or Rahu) (T.T.: Khyab.hJug.): a legendary planet 
which was supposed to be malignant to the destinies of mankind, and was known 
for continually wreaking vengeance on the sun and the moon. 
2 Four Continents: See Story 2, Notes 15, 16, and 17. 
3 An enlightened mind- the Bodhi-Heart, or Bodhi-Mind (Skt.: Bodhicit· 
ta; T.T.: Byai1.Clmb.Scms.): This most important and frequently used term in Mahayana Buddhism signifies the fundamental spirit, doctrine, and philosophy of the 
Mahayana. Among the meanings and applications of this term, two are most significant: first, the vow and action of liberating all sentient beings from suffering and 
bringing them to Buddhahood; and second, the direct realization of the Ultimate 
Truth. To signify these different aspects of Bodhicitta, Bodhi-Heart, Bodhi-Mind, 
enlightened heart or mind, etc., are alternatively used in this book. See Story I, 
Note 20. 
4 Nhamdog (T.T.: rNam.rTog.): This is also a very frequently used term in 
Buddhist texts. It has many meanings, such as the incessant flow of thoughts; illusory conceptions; uncontrollable and wild notions; and wrong ideas. See Story 1, 
Note 12. 
5 Treading the Path of the Cemetery: Tantric yogis are urged to practice 
meditation in a cemetery, such surroundings being considered extremely helpful in 
furthering one's progress. 
6 Measureless Palace (T.T.: gShai.Yas.Khaii.): the heavenly "dwelling" of 
the Buddha in the "Pure Land," which transcends the limitation of space, and is 
immeasurable. 
7 This implies an eclipse. See Note 1. 
8 Dcva (T.T.: IHa.): In Tibetan scriptures, all Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, heavenly beings, gods, and goddesses arc called "Lha," but here it is used in a figurative 
sense. 

--- PAGE 75 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demo ness 
9 Mahayana Buddhism teaches that all religious practices and spiritual efforts 
should be dedicated to the welfare and emancipation of all sentient beings. 
10 Six Realms: the Six Worlds, or Lokas, in which different kinds of sentient beings live under different conditions. Devas, men, and asuras live in the upper 
three Lokas; animals, hungry ghosts, and denizens of hell, in the lower three. 
11 Habitual thoughts, (T.T.: Bag.Chags.; Skt.: Vasana): According to Mahayana Buddhism, especially Yogacara, sentient beings' consciousnesses are brought 
into play by the force of habitual thoughts. Reason and affect are all made up of 
the accumulated "psychic contents" that have been well-preserved in the Alaya or 
Store Consciousness. 
12 Suchness (T.T.: De.bShin.!\lid; Skt.: Tathata), is also translated as "Thatness," implying that Absolute Reality is essentially indescribable; it is as such all 
the time. 
13 Heart-air: See Story 1, Note 17. 
14 Dharma-clinging (T.T.: Chos.hDsin.): According to Buddhism. there are two 
forms of clinging: (1) The Clinging-to-Ego (see Note 28), and (2) the Clingingto-Dhanna. The Clinging-to-Dharma implies an innate tendency to hold becomings 
and manifestations to be real and subsistent. The very conception of "being," declares Mahayana Buddhism, is a product of the Clinging-to-Dharma. 
15 Self-awareness (T.T.: Ran.Rig.): the self-aware or self-witnessing faculty 
of the consciousness which is, according to Yogacara, the mind per se. The function 
of self-awareness is to be aware of the awareness itself; it is a pure awareness without 
any subject-content. To cultivate this pure awareness is the pinnacle practice of 
Mahamudra. 
16 Distraction and drowsiness: These two hindrances are experienced by all 
who practice meditation- the two major enemies of the yogi. 
17 The human mind is inclined either to cling to the "View of existenceand-permanency" (T.T.: rTag.ITa.), or to the "View of annihiliation-and-non-existence" (T.T.: Chad.ITa.). The former holds to the eternal existence of true being, 
and the latter to the ultimate annihiliation of all existence. The remedy for both 
of these extremes or "wrong views" is the Middle Way Doctrine upheld by Buddhism. 
18 Or, subjectivity and objectivity: All Saq1saric conceptions and emotions are 
characterized by a subjective-objective pattern- the knower and the known, the 
lover and the one loved, etc. This dualistic pattern of thought is the fundamental 
cause of Sa~T~sara. Enlightenment is but the transformation and emancipation from 
the two grabping jaws of the pincers of dualism. 
19 See Story 2, Note 21. 
20 Joking words: Milarepa here alludes to his remarks in praise of the demoness Draug Srin Mo, made in the beginning of the first song, as merely ridicule. 
21 Buddha and the Five Demons: On the eve of His enlightenment, Guatama Buddha conquered the demons of the Five Desires who came to afflict Him. 
22 The stock, or accumulation of merits (T.T.: Tshogs.bSags.): another frequently used phrase in Buddhism. This term implies a rather complicated doctrine 
of Buddhist ethics. In brief, all the "states of well-being," worldly or religious, material or spiritual, SaiTisaric or Nirvat:~ic, are brought into being through deeds-ofmerit. Buddhahood is viewed as the consummation of all merits. 
23 Bedma Tutrin (T.T.: Pat.Ma.Thod.Phren.): This is another name of Padrna SaiTibhava, the great Indian Yogi, who founded the Ningmaba School of Tibet. 
24 Violating the Precepts and one's Vows: This demoness once swore before 
Padma Sa~T~bhava to protect the Dharma and to observe the Precepts. 

--- PAGE 76 ---
25 Three Times: Past, present, and future. 
26 Passions (Skt.: Kle~as; T.T.: Non.Mofts.Pa.): This word is very difficult to 
translate into English accurately because of its various meanings. Usually it signifies 
the burning passions and desires, such as lust, hate, anger, blindness, distractions, 
and the like. Both the innate and the acquired desires which hinder the way to 
Nirva~a. are Kle~as. 
27 Five Poisonous Cravings, or Five Klesas: Lust, hate, blindness, pride, and 
jealousy. 
28 Clinging-to-Ego (Skt.: Atma-graha; T.T.: bDag.hDsin.): the delusion of a 
permanent, unconditioned Ego, which causes the continuation of Sa111saric existence. 
The Clinging to Ego manifests itself in two forms, (I) the Innate or Inborn Ego, 
the fundamental notion of "self"; and (2) the acquired Ego, which is developed 
through experience and education. 
29 Ceaseless mental activity or constant-flow-of-thought: Men's thoughts never 
stop, with or without their awareness. They continue to flow on unceasingly, like a 
waterfall. 
30 The rules of Vajrayana: Tantric or Samaya precepts. 
31 Vajra Hell: The purgatory where all violators of Tantric precepts go. 
32 Dorje Semba, (Skt.: Vajrasattva): Among the five 
"Ma~Qala" Buddhas, 
this is the one who sits in the center, sometimes also called Dorje-Chang, (Skt.: 
Vajradhara) from whom all the teachings of Tantra originated. 
33 Succession: A transmission of Tantric teachings. 
H Waves-of-Grace: The blessing power that emanates from Gurus of a Succession. This blessing power, or grace-wave, is considered to be one of the determining factors of a yogi's success in his devotion. The speed of his accomplishment 
is said to depend largely on the intensity and amount of the grace-waves that he is 
capable of receiving from his Guru. 
35 Hinayana, meaning the Small Vehicle, denotes the original form of Buddhism that developed after Sakyamuni's death. Hinayana Buddhism now prevails 
in Ceylon, Burma, and Siam, and is therefore also known as Southern Buddhism 
in contrast to Mahayana, meaning the Great Vehicle, now prevailing in Tibet, 
China, Korea, and Japan. 
36 For the sake of respect and reverence, Draug Srin Mo called Milarepa 
"Trolgu," the Incarnation, or Transforn1ation Body of Buddha (T.T.: sPrul.sKu.). 
However, Milarepa himself never claimed to be an incarnation of Buddha or a 
gifted, superior being. He asserted that he was an ordinary man. 
37 Dharmata (T.T.: Chos.Nid.), meaning the nature or truth of being. 
38 Alaya Consciousness or Store Consciousness (T.T.: Kun.gShi.rNam.<;;es.): 
the Eighth Consciousness. This consciousness has more than ten different names, 
which appear in the different Buddhist texts, each indicating one of its aspects or 
characteristics. The philosophy of Yogacara puts its main stress on the study of 
this Consciousness. "Kun.gShi.rNam.<;;es." may be translated as "Universal or 
Primordial Consciousness," the "All-sources Consciousness," the "Conciousness of 
Ripening ·Karma," etc. A fair study of this Consciousness is necessary for a better 
understanding of the teachings of Mahayana and of Tantric Buddhism. See Story 
10, Note 1. 
39 The literal translation should he "the visions of ghosts." Milarepa referred 
to the conjurations of Draug Srin Mo. 
40 The conception of "Yes and No," affirmation and negation. 
41 Lit.: Fom1-nature (T.T.: mTshan.l'lid.). This word originally means defi-

--- PAGE 77 ---
Challenge from a Wise Demo ness 
nition, reason, essence, nature, etc. Here Milarepa used it in a very loose sense, 
implying something quite different from the above ordinary usage of this term. 
42 Enlightened yogis always have a good sense of humor. Being fully aware 
of the limitation of words and the absurdity of human conceptions, they sometimes ridicule their own words, which also cannot escape the dilemma and predicament inherent in the human way of thinking and expression. 
43 Great Bliss (T.T.: bDe.Chen.) implies the great ecstasy the yogi experiences 
in meditation. 
44 Nectar: The literal translation should be, "The Nectar of Non-outHowing" 
(T.T.: Zag.l\Icd.). Using yogic Power, the yogi may increase the secretion of the 
salivary glands to quench his feeling of thirst. 

--- PAGE 78 ---
MILAREPA IN RAGMA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W
HEN the Jetsun Milarepa decided to go to Riwo Balnbar from 
Linba Draug to practice meditation, he notified his patrons in 
Ragma. They said, "Near Riwo Balnbar there is a temple in a very 
delightful place. We recommend that you stay there. As to Riwo Balnbar, we do not know very much about it. Revered One, you may remain in the temple at first; meantime, we will send out people to 
survey the region for you." 
Milarepa thought to himself, "First I shall go to the temple for 
awhile, then I shall proceed to Riwo Balnbar." He .then said to them, 
"I do not need your guide; I can find the way myself." When the 
patrons asked, "Do yo;.~ have a guide?" Milarepa replied, "Yes, I have." 
"Who is he? Tell us more about him." 
In answer Milarepa sang: 
The glorious and accomplished Guru 
Who dispels the darkness, is the guide. 
Away from cold and warmth, these cotton 
clothes, 1 
By which I renounce fur-craving, are the guide. 
The Invocation, Identification, and 
Transformation Yogas2 
Which crush the delusion of Bardo, are 
the guide. 
That which shows you the way in all journeys 
through all landsThe complete mastery of PraQa-Mind3 
is the guide. · 
--- PAGE 79 ---
Milarepa in Ragma 
To give up one's body as a good-offering4 -
The teaching of Subduing-the-Ego- is the guide. 
To remain in solitude and practice meditation, 
Leading one to Enlightenment, is the guide. 
Led by these six guides, and abiding in 
Jaung Chub Tsong,5 
All will be well with me. 
Thereupon Milarepa went to the upper part of Ragma, which from 
that time on was called Jaung Chub Tsong. He then absorbed himself in the Samadhi of the Flowing River.6 
One midnight, he heard a great noise and clamor, horns roaring in 
the air as if an army in battle were approaching. Milarepa thought, "Is 
there fighting in this country?" He then absorbed himself in the 
Samadhi of Great Compassion. But the sound came closer and closer. 
Both Heaven and earth seemed bathed in red light. Milarepa wondered what was happening. He looked about and saw that the whole 
plain was burning, that nothing was left on earth or in Heaven. A 
band of the [demon] army was busily engaged in lighting fires, 
tossing water, and throwing down mountains. Through innumerable 
conjurations, the demons threatened Milarepa with many types of 
weapons, tearing down the rocks and the cave, and also heaping him 
with abuse. Milarepa became aware that demons were assembling to 
affiict him. He thought, "What a pity, from time immemorial until 
now these sinful Ah Tsa Ma Demons7 have practiced evil deeds in the 
Six Realms, thus becoming hungry specters flying in the sky. With 
vicious thoughts and evil intentions they have harmed so many sentient beings, that with this black Karma they have no choice but to go 
to a hell in their future life." With great compassion, therefore, Milarepa sang: 
I pay homage to you, Marpa the Translator. 
In the immense sky of your compassion 
Are gathered from all sides the clouds of mercy 
From which fell the productive rain of grace. 
Thus the harvest of your disciples was increased. 
To immeasurable sentient beings as infinite 
as space, 
Pray grant your grace-waves for the attainment 
of Enlightenment. 

--- PAGE 80 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREP.\ 
You assembled Non-men and demons, 
You who fly and travel in the sky 
Perpetually longing for food, 
You hungry specters! 
Driven by the force of Full-ripening Karma,8 
In this life you were born as hungry ghosts; 
Also by the Karma of evil-doing, 
Through harming others, 
You shall fall into a hell in your future life. 
I sing of the truths of Karma. 
Think closely on these beneficent words. 
I am the son of Ghagyu Gurus; 
With faith arising in my heart, 
I am learning the Dharma. 
Knowing the Law of Cause and of Effect; 
I practice austere living; 
Diligent and persevering, 
I see the true nature of Mind. 
I realize that all forms are but illusions [Maya]. 
I thus free myself from the illness of ego-clinging, 
I thus cut off the Subject-Object Fetter9 
of SaJ'!1Sara, 
And reach the Buddha's realm, the immutable Dharmakiiya. 
I am a yogi who has gone beyond the [human] mind; 
How can you afflict me, you troublemakers? 
Your vicious deeds and mischievous intentions, 
Weary you, but do me no harm. 
Again, you must know that mind is the 
source of hatred. 
Though from the depths of the eighteen 
hells below 
To the Heaven of Brahma above, 
You collect all the forces therein to 
throw against me, 
It can hardly ripple my all-embracing Wisdom, 
For in my mind no fear can arise. 
You assembled demons and Non-men, 
With all your spells and magic weapons, 

--- PAGE 81 ---
Milarepa in Ragma 
You cannot hurt me; 
All you have done is useless. 
What a waste and pity if you return 
without harming me! 
Show your power and do your worst, you 
pitiable demons. 
Whereupon Milarepa became absorbed in the Samadhi of Suchness. 
(Awed and overpowered by his greatness], all the demons repented 
before him and became faithful to him. They made obeisance and 
circumambulated him many times, saying: "We were indeed blind, 
not knowing that you are such an accomplished yogi. Pray forgive us 
for what we have done to you. From now on we will follow whatever instructions you may give. Pray grant us the teachings, so a relationship in Dharma may thus be established between us." 
Milarepa replied, "Very well. In that case I shall give you this 
teaching": 
Refrain from sin, 
Practice virtue! 
All the demons cried, "Yes, we will obey!" Then they offered him 
their lives and hearts, and also promised the Jetsun to obey his orders. 
Following this, they all went back to their own realm. 
Among them was one called Seyi Lhamo, from Mang, and others 
were local deities from Riwo Balnbar. Milarepa felt that, since the 
demons of Riwo Balnbar had already been subdued, it would not be 
necessary to go there to meditate any more. He decided to remain at 
the Bodhi-Place for a few days. In a very elated mood he sang: 
Here in the home of Enlightenment, 
I, the Bodhi-Path (practitioner], Milarepa, 
Who has mastered the Mind-of-Bodhi, 
Practice the Yoga of Bodhi-Heart. 
I will soon obtain the great Bodhi, 
And bring the innumerable mother-like beings10 
To the sanctuary of Perfect Enlightenment. 
One day, a patron came to Milarepa's hut bringing with him a load 
of wood and a half-measure of flour. The visitor did not wear enough 
clothes and felt very cold. He said, "Ragma is the coldest region in 
the South and this is the coldest place in Ragma. I would like, Lama, 
to offer you a fur coat if you would accept it." 

--- PAGE 82 ---
Milarepa asked, "My dear patron, what is your name?" and the 
man replied, "Labar Shawa." Milarepa then said, "You have a very 
good name, indeed. Although I do not need your flour and fur coat, 
I thank you very much. I'll take the flour, if you wish, but as to the 
fur coat, I really do not need it." And he sang: 
As a child who loses his way home, 
The confused mind wanders in the Six 
delusive Realms. 
By the force of illusory Karma, 
One sees a myriad visions and feels 
endless emotions. 
Sometimes I have illusory feelings of hunger, 
Therefore I prepare my food and dinner. 
Sometimes I exert myself to build a house;11 
At others I endure the hardship of eating 
stones.12 
Sometimes I eat the food of Siinyata [Voidness]; 
Or I change my ways and do not eat at all.U 
At times when I feel thirsty, I drink pure 
blue water; 
At others, I rely on my own secretions. 
Frequently, I drink the flow from the 
Fountain of Compassion; 
Quite often, I sip enchanting nectar of goddesses. 
Sometimes I feel cold, so I wear the clothes 
of the Two Channels;14 
At others, Heat Yoga gives burning bliss 
and warmness. 
Occasionally, I change my ascetic way of life; 
At times when I feel like having friends 
around me; 
I live with the Wisdom of Awareness as my companion. 
I practice the white deeds of the Ten Virtues; 
I contemplate the true knowledge of Reality, 
And know for certain the self-radiant mind. 
Adorned with the precious gem of true knowledge, 

--- PAGE 83 ---
M ilarepa in Ragma 
I am the Yogi Milarepa -a lion among men. 
Proficient and victorious, I am skilled in 
meditation. 
On the snow mountain I practice in solitude. 
I am the yogi who obtains the fruits of merit, 
I am the Yogi Milarepa, a tiger among men. 
I have thrice animated the Bodhi-Mind,15 
I smile with joy at the Non-distinction of 
Means and Wisdom;16 
I dwell in the woods of the Radiant Valley 
of Remedy; 17 
And produce the fruits of the welfare of 
sentient beings. 
I am the Yogi Milarepa-an eagle among men. 
I have a pair of mighty wings of the clearsighted Arising Yoga;1s 
I possess two flying wings of the stable 
Perfecting Yoga.19 
I soar to the sky of Two-in-One Suchness;20 
I sleep in the cave of transcendental Truth; 
I attain the fruits of self and others' benefit. 
I am the Yogi Milarepa-a man among men. 
I am the one who sees the face of form, 
I am he who gives good counsel. 
I am a yogi without attributes. 
I am a man who cares not what may happen. 
I am an alms beggar who has no food, 
A nude hermit without clothes, 
A beggar without jewels. 
I have no place to lay my head; 
I am the one who never thinks of external 
objectsThe master of all yogic action. 
Like a madman, I am happy if death comes: 
I have nothing and want nought. 
If one desires to acquire property, 
--- PAGE 84 ---
It only leads to jealousy and anger; 
It merely causes trouble to the patrons 
And leads them into erring ways of life. 
To a yogi, all is fine and splendid! 
With a benevolent heart and accompanying blessings, 
Almsgiving should ever be your practice. 
I wish you all happiness and prosperity; 
I wish you good health, leisure, and long life. 
May you, in the next life, be born in the Pure 
Land of Buddha, 
There to practice [joyfully] the Dharma. 
May you then be able without ceasing 
To devote yourself to the welfare of all men. 
Thereupon, great faith in the Jetsun was aroused in this man. He 
said, "Because you are the accomplished Yogi Milarepa, you can do 
without these things. It is only for the sake of benefiting us sinful 
people that you remain here. Pray pity me and take my offerings." 
Thereafter, while l\1ilarepa stayed at the Bodhi-Place, this man always brought bountiful food and provisions to him. Imbued with 
great joy, Milarepa remained there for some time. 
One day, some villagers from Ragma came to see the Jetsun. They 
asked him, "Do you like this place? Do you feel happy in remaining 
here?" He replied, "Yes, I am very happy indeed. I am also greatly 
pleased with my progress." They asked "Why do you like this place 
so much? Why is it that you are so happy here? Pray tell us what 
you think of all these things!" In answer, Milarepa sang: 
Here is the Bodhi-Place, quiet and peaceful. 
The snow mountain, the dwelling place of 
deities, stands high above; 
Below, far from here in the village, my 
faithful patrons live; 
Surrounding it are mountains nestling in 
white snow. 
In the foreground stand the wish-granting trees; 
In the valley lie vast meadows, blooming wild. 
Around the pleasant, sweet-scented lotus, 
insects hum; 
. 
Along the banks of the stream 

--- PAGE 85 ---
Milarepa in Ragma 
And in the middle of the lake, 
Cranes bend their necks, enjoy the scene, 
and are content. 
On the branches of the trees, the wild birds sing; 
When the wind blows gently, slow dances 
the weeping willow; 
In the treetops monkeys bound and leap with joy; 
In the wild green pastures graze the scattered herds, 
And merry shepherds, gay and free from worry, 
Sing cheerful songs and play upon their reeds. 
The people of the world, with burning desires 
and craving, 
Distracted by affairs, become the slaves of earth. 
From the top of the Resplendent Gem Rock, 
I, the Yogi, see these things. 
Observing them, I know that they are fleeting 
and transient; 
Contemplating them, I realize that comforts 
and pleasures 
Are merely mirages and water-reflections. 
I see this life as a conjuration and a dream. 
Great compassion rises in my heart 
For those without a knowledge of this truth. 
The food I eat is the Space-Void; 
My meditation is Dhyana-beyond distraction. 
Myriad visions and various feelings all 
appear before meStrange indeed are Sa111saric phenomenal 
Truly amusing are the dharmas in the 
Three Worlds,21 
Oh, what a wonder, what a marvel! 
Void is their nature, yet everything is manifested. 
The villagers were [delighted with this song], and, with their faith 
also strengthened, they all returned home [in a very joyful mood]. 
This is the first part of the story of Milarepa's stay at Ragma. 

--- PAGE 86 ---
NOTES 
1 The yogi who practices Heat Yoga is supposed to wear only cottoJI clothing, no fur being allowed. The purpose of this rigid practice is twofold: to renounce 
the procurement of fur and the craving for it, and to train himself for doing without 
furs in an extremely cold region such as Tibet, thus stimulating the production of 
more inner heat. 
2 The Yogas (lit.: Instructions) of Invocation, Identification, and Transformation (T.T.: bSre.hPho.sKor.gSum.): In the Bardo plane (the intermediate stage 
between death and rebirth) the deceased sees numerous visions and images which 
are actually manifestations of his own mind. But, because of habitual-thinking 
and the Clinging-to-Ego, the uninitiated one cannot identify these visions and see 
into their true nature. Tantric Yoga not only serves the purpose of enabling one to 
realize the innate Buddhahood in this life, hut also is a preparation for the stage 
of Bardo. When a proficient yogi sees the various manifestations of the Bardo, he 
can immediately identify the sound which he hears with the Mantra (or invocation) 
of his patron Buddha, and the images he sees with figures of the same. Through the 
practice of the Yogas of Invocation, Identification, and Transformation in this lifetime, the yogi is able to dispel the fear of Bardo. These three Yogas may be described 
as follows: 
(I) Invocation Yoga: By praying, and reciting the Mantra of a special 
patron Buddha, the yogi invokes the protection of that tutelary. 
Identification Yoga: In Yoga practice, the yogi identifies or unites 
himself with the tutelary. Thus in the stage of Bardo, when wrathful 
(2) 
and peaceful deities appear, the yogi may identify himself with them. 
(See W. Y. Evans-Wentz' "Tibetan Book of the Dead," Oxford University Press, London, 19 57.) 
(3) Transformation Yoga: Through the practice of this Yoga the visions 
of the Bardo may be transformed at will. 
Pra~a-Mina or Energy-Mind (T.T.: Rluit. Sems.): This is an important 
term in Tantrism. It is said that a yogi who has mastered the Mind-energy, or Energymind, is capable of performing supernorn1al feats, one of them being to fly wherever he chooses. (See also Story 3, Note 2.) 
oi A special Tibetan Yoga called "gCod," devised for destroying one's Egoclinging. In practicing this Yoga, the yogi offers his own body to s"t:ntient beings 
through special visualizations. 
5 Jaung Chub Tsong: The Castle of Bodhi (T.T.: Byait.Chub.rDson.). 
6 Samadhi of the Flowing River: This refers to a mental state experienced 
by the yogi in Mahamudra practice, in which he feels he is free from attachment to 
all phenomena. Although immersed in phenomenal existence, he is not affected by 
it; he encompasses the flux of things, he watches the flux of becoming flow by. 
Though he is aware of the identity of himself and the flux, he knows that he is the 
master, and enjoys a liberated spirit within the great flow. (See also Story 2, Note oi .) 
7 Ah Tsa Ma demons: See Story 2, Note 5. 
8 Full-ripening Karma: See Story 2, Note 6. 
9 Subject-Object Fetter: The doer, and that which is done; the seer, and 
that which is seen; etc. This dualistic pattern of thought is considered to be the 
basic cause of Sal]lslira. 
10 Since in every incarnation one has a mother, from beginningless time one 
must have had innumerable mothers. In fact, according to Mahayana Buddhism, 

--- PAGE 87 ---
Milarepa in Ragma 
all sentient beings have had, more than once, a parental relationship between one 
another. This calls forth the great compassion of a Bodhisattva. 
11 This refers to Milarepa's labors for his Master, Marpa, in the trial period of 
his discipleship. (See Milarepa's Biography, "Tibet's Great Yogi, Milarepa," 2nd ed., 
edited by W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Oxford University Press, London, 1951.) 
12 Eating stones: To avoid involvement in the world, a technique for eating 
stones in place of food is provided for determined Tantric yogis. 
13 Through the power of Samadhi, the yogi is able to live without eating for 
a long time. 
14 Two Channels (T.T.: rTsa.gi'Iis.): the mystical right and left Channels in the 
human body through which yogic heat powers are engendered. Sec also Story 1, 
Note 28. 
15 The meaning of this sentence is not very clear. The translator believes 
that "thrice animated the Bodhi-Mind" signifies the complete unfoldment of the socalled three-fold Bodhi-Mind: (1) the Bodhisattva's Vow, (2) the Transcendental 
Bodhi-Mind, or the Non-distinction Wisdom, and (3) the "Occult" Bodhi-Mind, 
that is, according to Tantrism, the essence (semen), or the source-energy of the 
physical body. 
16 Non-distinction of Means and Wisdom, or, rendered in a different way, the 
Two-in-One Means-Wisdom: The Bodhisattva's activity includes two main facets, 
(1) the cultivation of Wisdom, i.e., the practice and realization of the PrajJiaparamita (Perfect Wisdom); and (2) the practice of Means or Virtue, i.e., the first 
five Paramitas, namely, charity, discipline, patience, diligence, and meditation. Only advanced yogis are capable of realizing the Non-distinction or Non-differentiation of these two practices. 
17 "Radiant" denotes the self-radiant or self-illuminating nature of Mind; "Valley of Remedy" denotes the realization of the Self-mind as being the cure or remedy 
for all evils. 
18 Arising Yoga (T.T.: sKyed.Rim.): In the Anuttara Tantra, the Supreme 
Tantra, there are two major practices: one is the Arising Yoga, the other is the Perfecting Yoga. The former is the preparation for the latter- it places emphasis 
on concentration and visualization exercises, and through them the Dhyana or Samadhi state is reached. Unless the yogi has reached a stage of advanced Dhyana 
or Samadhi, he is not capable of practicing the latter. 
19 Perfecting Yoga (T.T.: rDsogs.Rim.): the advanced Yoga of Tibetan Tantrism. It is a practice of uniting mind and Praf}a. (See W. Y. Evans-Wentz' 
"Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines," 2nd ed., Oxford University Press, London, 
1958.) 
20 Two-in-One Suchness: This term may also be rendered as "Non-dualistic 
Suchness." In the realm of Sarpsara, different views and interpretations on a thing 
are formed from different levels and positions. To the average person, a glass of 
water is merely a means of quenching thirst; to a physicist. it is a combination of 
elements in motion; and to a philosopher, it is a series of relationships. These different views or understandings, arising from different levels and realms of thinking, 
are thus the distinctive characteristic of Sarpsaric thought, whereas in the Two-inOne or Many-in-One State, these different views do not exist as such. 
21 The Three Worlds, or the Three Realms (T.T.: Khams.gSum.): According 
to Buddhism, these are the World of Desire, the World of Form, and the World of 
Non-form. They are believed to include all sentient beings in the various realms of 
Sarpsaric existence. 

--- PAGE 88 ---
~,, 
MILAREPA AT 
JUNPAN NANKA TSANG 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
Do~ Ragma, Milarepa. went to Junpan Nanka Tsang1 and re1 'mained there for some bme. 
One day a monkey came to Milarepa's hut riding on a rabbit, wearing mushroom armor and carrying a bow and arrow made from stalks. 
[His appearance was so ludicrous that] Milarepa could not help 
laughing. The demon said to the Jetsun, "You came here through 
fear.2 If you are no longer afraid, you can go away." Milarepa replied, 
"I realize fully that manifestation is Mind itself; also, I see that MindEssence is identical with the Dharmakaya. You pitiable wraith! Whatever apparitions you may conjure, they are a mere laughing matter to 
me." Thereupon, the demon made his offering and took an oath before Milarepa. Then, like a rainbow, he disappeared into the sky. He 
was the demon king of Oro Tang. 
One day, Milarepa's patrons from Oro Tang came to visit him. They 
aaked him what benefits Junpan Nanka Tsang had to offer. In reply, 
Milarepa sang: 
I pray to my Guru, the Holy One. 
Listen, my patrons, and I will tell you 
the merits of this place. 
In the goodly quiet of this Sky Castle of Junpan 
High above, dark clouds gather; 
Deep blue and far below flows the River Tsang. 
At my back the Red Rock of Heaven rises; 
At my feet, wild flowers bloom, vibrant 
and profuse; 
--- PAGE 89 ---
Milarepa at Junpan Nanka Tsang 
At my cave's edge [wild] beasts roam, roar, 
and grunt; 
In the sky vultures and eagles circle freely, 
While from heaven drifts the drizzling rain. 
Bees hum and buzz with their chanting; 
Mares and foals gambol and gallop wildly; 
The brook chatters past pebbles and rocks; 
Through the trees monkeys leap and swing; 
And larks carol in sweet song. 
The timely sounds I hear are all my fellows. 
The merits of this place are inconceivableI now relate them to you in this song. 
Oh, good patrons, 
Pray follow my Path and my example; 
Abandon evil, and practice goo~ deeds. 
Spontaneously from my heart 
I give you this instruction. 
There was a Tantric yogi among the patrons who said to Milarepa, 
"We would be deeply grateful if you would graciously give us the essential instructions on the View, Meditation, and Action,3 as a greeting or a gift of welcome." 
Milarepa sang in reply: 
The grace of my Guru enters my heart; 
Pray help me to realize the truth of the Void! 
In answer to my faithful patrons, 
I sing to please the Deities and Buddhas: 
Manifestation, the Void, and Non-differentiation, 
These three are the quintessence of the View. 
Illumination, Non-thought, and Non-distraction 
Are the quintessence of the Meditation. 
Non-clinging, Non-attachment, and complete 
Indifference 
Are the quintessence of the Action. 

--- PAGE 90 ---
No Hope, no Fear, and no Confusion 
Are the quintessence of Accomplishment. 
Non-attempt, Non-hiding, and Non-discrimination, 
These three are the quintessence of the Precept. 
Having heard l'vlilarepa's song, the patrons all returned home. A few 
days later, many disciples came again to visit the Jetsun, asking after 
his health and welfare, and giving their best wishes. Milarepa sang in 
response: 
I bow down at the feet of my Guru. 
Deep in the forest by man untrod, 
I, Milarepa, happily practice meditation. 
With no attachment and no clinging, 
Walking and tranquility are both pleasing. 
Free from sickness and disorder, I willingly 
sustain this body of illusion; 
Never sleeping, I sit in the comfort of quietude. 
Abiding in the Samadhi of Non-permanence,• 
I taste enjoyment. 
Continuance in Heat-Yoga without cold is 
indeed felicitous. 
With no cowardliness or dismay, 
Joyfully I follow the Tantric practice; 
With no effort I perfect the cultivation; 
With no distraction whatsoever, 
Remaining in solitude, I am truly happy. 
These are the pleasures of the body. 
Happy is the path of both Wisdom and Means!5 
Happy the Yoga of Arising and Perfecting; 
the meditation of the Two-in-One. 
Happy the Prajfiii; the awareness of nocoming-and-going! 
Happy the absence of talk; no friends and 
no chatting! 
These are the pleasures of words. 

--- PAGE 91 ---
Milarepa at Junpan Nanka Tsang 
Happy is the understanding of Non-grasping; 
Happy the meditation without interruption; 
Happy the accomplishment without hope or fear; 
Happy the action done without defilement. 
These are the pleasures of Mind. 
Happy is the illumination with no thought 
and no mutation! 
Happy the great bliss in the purity of 
Dharmadhatu! 6 
Happy the Non-ceasing Realm of Form! 
This little song of great happiness 
That flows freely from my heart, 
Is inspired by meditation, 
By the merging of act and knowledge. 
Those who aim at the fruit of Bodhi 
May follow this way of yogic practice. 
The disciples said to Milarepa, "Wonderful indeed are the joys of 
Body, Word, and Mind, as you have just said. Pray tell us, how 
were they brought about?" Milarepa replied, "By the realization of 
Mind." The disciples then said, "Although we shall never be able to 
acquire such happiness and pleasures as you have enjoyed, we hope that 
we can win a small portion; we beg you, therefore, to give us a clear 
teaching, easy to understand and simple to practice, by which we may 
realize the Essence of Mind." \Vhereupon the Jetsun sang "The 
Twelve Meanings of Mind": 
I bow down at the feet of my Guru. 
Oh good patrons! If you wish to realize 
the Essence of ~'lind, 
You should practice the following teachings: 
Faith, knowledge, and discipline, 
These three are the Life-Tree7 of Mind. 
This is the tree you should plant and foster. 
Non-attachment, non-clinging, and non-blindness, 
These three are the shields of Mind; 
They are light to wear, strong for defense, 
And the shields you should seek. 

--- PAGE 92 ---
Meditation, diligence, and perseverance, 
These three are the horses of Mind; 
They run fast and quickly flee! 
If you look for horses, these are the right ones. 
Self-awareness, self-illumination, and 
self-rapture,8 
These three are the fruits of Mind; 
Sow the seeds, ripen the fruit, 
Refine the fluid, and the essence emerges. 
If you look for fruit, these are the fruit 
you should seek. 
Sprung from yogic intuition, 
This song of the Twelve Meanings of Mind is sung. 
Inspired by your faith, continue with your 
practice, my good patrons! 
Henceforth, the patrons placed even more faith in Milarepa, and 
brought him excellent offerings. Milarepa then decided to go to Yolmo Snow Range. 
This is the story of Milarepa at Junpan Nanka Tsang (The Sky 
Castle of Junpan]. 
NOTES 
1 Junpan 
Nanka 
Tsan 
(T.T.: 
rKan.Phan.Nam.mKhah.rDson.): 
a 
place 
near the Himalaya Mountains, meaning "The Sky Castle of Junpan." 
2 Fear: the fear of suffering in Sa!Jlsara, that motivates the yogi's striving for 
emancipation. 
3 View, Meditation, and Action; or View, Practice, and Action (T.T.: ITa., 
sCorn., sPyod.): "View" is the knowledge or principle upon which all meditations 
are based and religious activities conducted. "Practice" refers to the yogic exercise 
of the View; "Action" to a state in which the yogi is absorbed in the View while 
carrying out his daily activities. The following example illustrates these terms: In the 
case of the Mahamudra teaching, the View is the understanding of the void nature 
of Mind; the Practice is the contemplation on this understanding; and the Action 
is the mindfulness of this View in daily aCti\'ities, meaning that the yogi is able to 
remember his meditation experience even during all the vicissitudes of his daily existence. 

--- PAGE 93 ---
Milarepa at Junpan Nanka Tsang 
4 Non-permanence: The realization of higher Samadhis should transcend both 
transitoriness and permanence. 
5 Wisdom and Means (Skt.: Praji'ia [and) Upaya; T.T.: Thabs. [and) Ges. 
Rab.): Wisdom is the understanding, or the View, or the "eye" of the yogi, while 
Means are the methods, the techniques, or the "legs." 
6 Dharmadhatu (T.T.: Chos.dWyin.): This term has several different mean· 
ings. Here it means the Universal, Infinity, Totality, and the like. 
7 Life-Tree (T.T.: Srog.Gift.): a symbolic term used to denote the life force 
upon which the existence of one's life depends. It also refers to the spine. Sometimes 
it denotes the center pillar in Buddhist stiipas. 
8 Self-awareness, self-illumination, self-rapture (T.T.: Ran.Ri., Ran.gSal., Rai1 
bDe.): Despite the fact that the nature of Mind is indescribable, it can be appre· 
hended through an illustration of its three main characteristics, i.e., self-awareness, 
self-illumination, and self-rapture, of which, though existing all the time, the un· 
initiated are not aware. Being conscious of consciousness (or self-awareness) is to 
approach the threshold of Enlightenment; the self-illuminating and self-rapturous 
aspects of mind were claimed by Buddhist sages, who found, in their mystical experiences, that the mind was itself illuminating and blissful. 

--- PAGE 94 ---
THE SONG 
OF A YOGI'S JOY 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
T
HE Master of Yoga, the Jetsun Milarepa, in obedience to his Guru's 
orders, went from Junpan to Yolmo Snow Range, where he dwelt 
at the Tiger Cave of Senge Tson 1 in the woods of Singalin. The 
local goddess of Yolmo appeared in a gracious form, obeying the 
Jetsun's orders and rendering her best service to him. Milarepa remained there for some time in a deeply inspired mood. 
One day, five young m<ns came from Mon to visit him. They addressed him thus: "It is said that this place is full of terror, and an 
ideal place in which to attain great improvement in meditation. Can 
this be true? Have you found it so?" Milarepa then sang in praise of 
the place: 
Obeisance to you, my Guru! 
I met you through having accumulated great merits, 
And now'stay at the place you prophesied.2 
This is a delightful place, a place of hills 
and forests. 
In the mountain-meadows, flowers. bloom; 
In the woods dance the swaying trees! 
For monkeys it is a playground. 
Birds sing tunefully, 
Bees fly and buzz, 
And from day until night the rainbows come and go. 
In summer and winter falls the sweet rain, 
And mist and fog roll up in fall and spring. 
At such a pleasant place, in solitude, 
--- PAGE 95 ---
The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
I, Milarepa, happily abide, 
Meditating upon the void-illuminating Mind. 
Oh, happy are the myriad manifestations! 
The more ups-and-downs, the more joy I feel. 
Happy is the body with no sinful Karma, 
Happy indeed are the countless confusions! 
The greater the fear, the greater the 
happiness I feel,3 
Oh, happy is the death of sensations and passions! 
The greater the distress and passions, 
The more can one be blithe and gay! 
What happiness to feel no ailment or illness; 
What happiness to feel that joy and suffering 
are one; 
What happiness to play in bodily movement 
With the power aroused by Yoga. 
To jump and run, to dance and leap, is 
more joyful still. 
What happiness to sing the victorious song, 
What happiness to chant and hum, 
More joyful still to talk and loudly sing! 
Happy is the mind, powerful and confident, 
Steeped in the realm of Totality. 
The most extreme happiness 
Is the self-emanation of self-power; 
Happy are the myriad forms, the myriad revelations. 
As a welcoming gift to my faithful pupils, 
I sing of yogic happiness. 
Thereupon, Milarepa initiated the five young nun-novices and gave 
them the verbal instructions. After practicing these teachings for some 
time, the light of inner Realization was born within them. Milarepa 
was overjoyed and sang the "Nectar of Instruction": 
Oh, my Guru, he who shows 
The unmistakable path to Liberation, 
The Perfect Savior, the great Compassionate One, 
Pray, never leave me, ever remain 
Above my head• as my crest-jewell 

--- PAGE 96 ---
Hearken, followers of the Dharma, 
Ye meditators seated here, 
Though the teachings of Buddha are most numerous, 
He who can practice this Profound Path5 
Is gifted indeed! 
If you wish to become a Buddha in one lifetime, 
You should not crave the things of this life, 
Nor intensify your self-longing, 
Else you will be entangled between good and evil, 
And you may fall into the realm of misery. 
When you give service to your Guru, 
Refrain from thinking, "I am the one who works, 
He is the one who enjoys." 
Should you have this kind of feeling, 
Quarrel and discord will surely follow, 
And your wish can never be fulfilled. 
When you observe the Tantric Precepts, 
Cease association with the vicious, 
Else you will be contaminated by evil influences, 
And you may risk breaking the Precepts. 
When you engage in study and learning, 
Do not attach yourself to words with pride, 
Else the dormant fire of the Five 
Poisonous Passions6 will blaze, 
And virtuous thoughts and deeds will be consumed. 
When you meditate with friends in retreat, 
Do not attempt too many things, 
Else your virtuous deeds will cease, 
And your devotion will be distracted. 
When you practice the Path with Form7 
of the Whispered Transmission,8 
Do not exorcise demons, nor curse ghosts for others, 
Lest demons rise within your mind 
And a longing for worldly aims will blaze. 
When you have acquired Experience and 
Realization, o 

--- PAGE 97 ---
The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
Do not display your miraculous powers, nor prophesy, 
Lest the secret words and symbols slip away 
And merits and spiritual insight will diminish. 
Beware of these pitfalls and avoid them. 
Commit not evil deeds. Eat not beguiling food. 
Take not the burden of the corpse.10 
Utter not sweet words to please others. 
Be humble and modest, and you will find your way. 
The nuns then asked Milarepa how they might find their own way, 
beseeching him for further instruction. In reply, Milarepa sang: 
I pay homage to my Guru, the gracious one. 
I pray you to vouchsafe me your grace-waves. 
Pray help me, the mendicant, happily to meditate. 
Though you children of the new generation 
Dwell in towns infested with deceitful Karma, 
The link of Dharma still remains. 
Because you have heard the Buddha's teaching 
You now come to me, 
And thus avoid going astray. 
By constant practice of the Accumulationof-Merits11 
You will foster an aptitude for devotion. 
The grace-waves will then enter you, 
While the corresponding and actual 
Realization12 will grow. 
But even if you do all this, it will help 
but little 
If you cannot reach full mastery. 
Having pity on you, I now give you this instruction. 
Listen closely, my young friends! 
When you remain in solitude, 
Think not of the amusements in the town, 
Else the evil one will rise up in your heart; 
Tum inward your mind, 
And you will find your way. 

--- PAGE 98 ---
When you meditate with perseverance and 
determination, 
You should think upon the evils of SaJ.Tisara 
And the uncertainty of death. 
Shun the craving for worldly pleasures; 
Courage and patience then will grow in you, 
And you will find your way. 
When you solicit the deep teachings of 
the Practice, 
Do not long for learning, nor to become a scholar, 
Else worldly actions and desires will dominate; 
Then this very life will be thrown away. 
Be humble and modest, 
And you will find your way. 
When the various experiences come to you 
in meditation, 
Do not be proud and anxious to tell people, 
Else you will disturb the Goddesses and Mothers.13 
Meditate without distractions, 
And you will find your way. 
When you accompany your Guru, 
Do not look upon his merits or demerits, 
Else you will find mountains of faults. 
Only with faith and loyalty 
Will you find your way. 
When you attend holy meetings 
With brothers and sisters in the Dharma, 
Do not think of heading the row, 
Else you will arouse both hate and craving, 
And offend against the Precepts. 
Adjust yourselves, understand each other, 
And you will find your way. 
When you beg for alms in the village, 
Do not use the Dharma for deceit and exploitation, 
Else you will force yourself down to the lower Path. 
Be honest and sincere, 
And you will find your way. 

--- PAGE 99 ---
The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
Beyond all else remember, at all times and places, 
Ne\'er be overweening, nor of yourself be proud, 
Else you will be overbearing in your self-esteem 
. And overloaded with hypocrisy. 
If you abandon deceit and pretense, 
You will find your way. 
The person who has found the way 
Can pass on the gracious teachings to others; 
Thus he aids himself and helps the others, too. 
To give is then the only thought 
Remaining in his heart. 
The disciples were all greatly inspired with the determination to 
practice diligently and to renounce the world. An unalterable faith in 
the Jetsun was established in them. They said, "We want to offer you 
a golden Mai)c;lala.H Pray accept it, and give us the practical teaching 
of the View, Practice, and Action." 
Milarepa replied, "I do not need the gold; you may use it to maintain your meditation. As for the teaching of the View, Practice, and 
Action, I shall tell you. Pray hearken to my song": 
Oh, my Guru! The Exemplar of the View, 
Practice, and Action, 
Pray vouchsafe me your grace, and enable me 
To be absorbed in the realm of Self-nature! 
For the View, Practice, Action, and Accomplishment 
There are three Key-points you should know: 
All the manifestation, the Universe itself, 
is contained in the mind; 
The nature of Mind is the realm of illumination 
Which can neither be conceived nor touched. 
These are the Key-points of the View. 
Errant thoughts are liberated in the Dharmakaya; 
The awareness, the illumination, is always 
blissful; 
Meditate in a manner of non-doing and non-effort. 
These are the Key-points of Practice. 
In the action of naturalness 

--- PAGE 100 ---
The Ten Virtues spontaneously grow; 
All the Ten Vices are thus purified. 
By corrections or remedies 
The Illuminating Void is ne'er disturbed.15 
These are the Key-points of Action. 
There is no NirvaQa to attain beyond; 
There is no Saq~sara here to renounce; 
Truly to know the Self-mind 
It is to be the Buddha Himself. 
These are the Key-points of Accomplishment. 
Reduce inwarqly the Three Key-points to One. 
This One is the Void Nature of Being, 
Which only a wondrous Guru 
Can clearly illustrate. 
Much activity is of no avail; 
If one sees the Simultaneously Bom16 Wisdom, 
He reaches his goal. 
For all practitioners of Dharma 
This preaching is a precious gem; 
It is my direct experience from yogic meditation. 
Think carefully and bear it in your minds, 
Oh, my children and disciples. 
The disciples then asked Milarcpa, "As we understood you, the unmistakable guide along the Path of Practice is to pray to one's Guru 
with great earnestness. Is there anything else beyond this?" Milarepa 
smiled and answered, "The Tree of Guidance has also many branches." 
In explaining this to them, he sang: 
The Guru, the disciple, and the secret teachings; 
Endurance, perseverance, and the faith; 
Wisdom, compassion, and the human form; 
All these are ever guides upon the Path. 
Solitude with no commotion and disturbance 
Is the guide protecting meditation. 
The accomplished Guru, the Jetsun, 
Is the guide dispelling ignorance and darkness. 
Faith without sorrow and weariness 

--- PAGE 101 ---
The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
Is the guide which leads you safely to happiness. 
The sensations of the five organs 
Are the guides which lead you to freedom 
from "contact."17 
The verbal teachings of the Lineage Gurus 
Are the guides which illustrate the Three 
Bodies of Buddha. 
The protectors, the Three Precious Ones, 
Are the guides with no faults or mistakes. 
Led by these six guides, 
One will reach the happy plane of YogaAbiding in the realm of Non-differentiation 
In which all views and sophisms18 are no more. 
Remaining in the realm of self-knowledge 
and self-liberation 
Is indeed happy and joyful; 
Abiding in the valley where no men dwell, 
With confidence and knowledge, one lives 
in his own way. 
With a thundering voice, 
He sings the happy song of Yoga. 
Falling in the Ten Directions is the rain of fame; 
Brought to blooming are the flowers and 
leaves of Compassion. 
The enterprise of Bodhi encompasses the Universe; 
The pure fruit of the Bodhi-Heart thus 
attains perfection. 
The disciples thought, "It makes no difference now to the Jetsun 
where he stays. We will invite him to our village." Thereupon they said 
to Milarepa, "Revered One, since your mind no longer ehanges, there 
is no need for you to practice meditation. Therefore, for the sake of 
sentient beings please come to our village and preach the Dharma for 
us." Mila{epa replied, "Practicing meditation in solitude is, in itself, a 
service to the people. Although my mind no longer changes, it is 
still a good tradition for a great yogi to remain in solitude." He 
then sang: 
Through the practice [of meditation] I 
show gratitude to my Guru. 
Pray grant me your grace, ripen and liberate me. 

--- PAGE 102 ---
You, gifted disciples, the followers of Dharma, 
Heed carefully, with all attention 
While I sing of the profound Essential Teaching. 
The great lioness in the upper snow mountain 
Poses proudly on the summit of the peak; 
She is not afraidProudly dwelling on the mountain 
Is the snow lion's way. 
The queen vulture on Red Rock 
Stretches her wings in the wide sky; 
She is not afraid of fallingFlying through the sky is the vulture's way. 
In the depths of the great ocean 
Darts the Queen of fish, glittering; 
She is not afraidSwimming is the fish's way. 
On the branches of the oak trees, 
Agile monkeys swing and leap; 
They are not afraid of fallingSuch is the wild monkey's way. 
Under the leafy canopy of the dense wood, 
The striped tiger roams and swiftly runs, 
Not because of fear or worryThis shows her haughty pride, 
And is the mighty tiger's way. 
In the wood on Singa Mountain, 
I, Milarepa, meditate on Voidness, 
Not because I fear to lose my understandingConstant meditation is the yogi's way. 
Without distraction, the yogi meditates absorbed 
Upon the pure Mal)c;lala of Dharmadhatu, 
Not because he fears to go astrayBut to hold to Self-quintessence is the yogi's way. 
When he works on the Nadis, Pral).a, and Bindu18 
He avoids hindrances and errors, 

--- PAGE 103 ---
The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
Not that the teaching has faults in itselfBut it is a good way to improve true Realization. 
With natural and spontaneous behavior 
One surely meets with countless ups-and-downs,20 
Not because there is discrimination and 
dualistic thoughtBut because to manifest all, is causation's nature. 
When he develops other beings by 
demonstrating the power of Karma, 
Though seemingly he sees as real both good and evil, 
It is not because he has gone astray in his 
practice,21 
But because, to explain the truth to different 
people, 
He must use appropriate illustrations. 
Those great yogis who have mastered the Practice, 
Never desire anything in this world. 
It is not because they want fame that 
they remain in solitude; 
It is the natural sign springing from their heartsThe true feeling of non-attachment and renunciation. 
Yogis who practice the teaching of the 
Path Profound, 
Dwell always in caves and mountains; 
Not that they are cynical or pompous, 
But to concentrate on meditation is their 
self-willing. 
I, the cotton-clad,22 have sung many songs, 
Not to amuse myself by singing sophistries, 
But for your sake, faithful followers who 
assemble here, 
From my heart I have spoken words helpful 
and profound. 
The disciples then said to Milarepa, "One may live alone in solitude, but it is necessary to have food and a suitable dwelling in which 
he can meditate properly." The Jetsun replied, "I have my own food 
and dwe11ing which I will illustrate to you." 

--- PAGE 104 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF 1\ULAREPA 
I bow down at the feet of the wish-fulfilling Guru. 
Pray vouchsafe me your grace in bestowing 
beneficial food, 
Pray make me realize my own body as the 
house of Buddha, 
Pray grant me this sure knowledge. 
I built the house23 through fear, 
The house of Siinyata, the void nature of being; 
Now I have no fear of its collapsing. 
I, the Yogi with the wish-fulfilling gem, 
Feel happiness and joy where'er I stay. 
Because of the fear of cold, I sought for clothes; 
The clothing I found is the Ah Shea Vital Heat.2' 
Now I have no fear of coldness. 
Because of the fear of poverty, I sought for riches; 
The riches I found are the inexhaustible 
Seven Holy Jewels.25 
Now I have no fear of poverty. 
Because of the fear of hunger, I sought for food; 
The food I found is the Samadhi of Suchness. 
Now I have no fear of hunger. 
Because of the fear of thirst, I sought for drink; 
The heavenly drink I found is the wine 
of mindfulness.28 
Now I have no fear of thirst. 
Because of the fear of loneliness, I searched 
for a friend; 
The friend I found is the bliss of 
perpetual Siinyata.2T 
Now I have no fear of loneliness. 
Because of the fear of going astray, 
I sought for the right path to follow. 
The wide path I found is the Path of 
Two-in-One.28 
Now I do not fear to lose my way. 

--- PAGE 105 ---
The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
I am a yogi with all desirable possessions, 
A man always happy where'er he stays. 
Here at Yolmo Tagpu Senge Tson, 
The tigress howling with a pathetic, trembling cry, 
Reminds me that her helpless cubs are 
innocently playing. 
I cannot help but feel a great compassion for them, 
I cannot help but practice more diligently, 
I cannot help but augment thus my Bodhi-Mind. 
The touching cry of the monkey, 
So impressive and so moving, 
Cannot help but raise in me deep pity. 
The little monkey's chattering is amusing 
and pathetic; 
As I hear it, I cannot but think of it with 
compassion. 
The voice of the cuckoo is so moving, 
And so tuneful is the lark's sweet singing, 
That when I hear them I cannot help but listenWhen I listen to them, 
I cannot help but shed my tears. 
The varied cries and cawing of the crow, 
Are a good and helpful friend unto the yogi. 
Even without a single friend, 
To remain here is a pleasure. 
With joy flowing from my heart, I sing this happy song; 
May the dark shadow of all men's sorrows 
Be dispelled by my joyful singing. 
The disciples were all deeply moved, and a feeling of weariness 
with Saqtsara overwhelmed them. They swore to Milarepa that they 
would never leave the mountain. Afterwards, through the practice of 
meditation, they all reached the state of perfection. 
One day, Milarepa's patron Buddha29 told him the time had come 
for him to go to Tibet proper and there meditate in solitude to help 
sentient beings. The patron Buddha also prophesied the success of his 
career in helping people and in spreading the Dharma. Hence, about 
this time, Milarepa decided to go to Tibet. 
This is the story of Yolmo Snow Mountain. 

--- PAGE 106 ---
NOTES 
1 T.T.: sTag.Pug.Sen.Ge.rDson.- the Tiger Cave at Lion Place. 
2 Marpa, Milarepa's Guru, admonished Milarepa to remain in solitude for 
most of his life. He also prophesied as to those places wherein Milarepa should 
practice meditation. 
3 The one who practices Mahamudra should know that, from the ultimate 
viewpoint, Saq1sara is Nirvana, evil is good, Kle~as are Bodhi. The up-and-down 
feelings, or the vici~situdinous emotions occurring in meditation, do not in their 
ultimate sense differ from Mind-Essence. To an advanced yogi, the greater the 
Kle~as that arise in his mind, the brighter, deeper, and better his illumination as to 
Reality. 
4 According to Tantrism the Guru is even more important than Buddha. To 
be blessed by one's Guru is of the utmost importance. According to Tibetan tradition, in the beginning of any type of meditation, the yogi always visualizes the Guru 
sitting above his head, and prays to him. 
5 Here Milarepa implies the teaching of advanced Tantrism. 
6 The Five Poisonous Passions or Desires (the Five Kle~as) are lust, hate, 
blindness, pride, and jealousy. 
7 Path with Form: the Arising Yoga and the Perfecting Yoga of Tantrism 
(see the translator's comments in the Appendix, and Story 5, Notes 18 and 19). 
8 Whispered Transmission (T.T.: sJ'Ian.brGyud.): (I) We are told that in 
olden days the hidden teachings of Tantra were given to the disciples in a most 
secret manner, i.e., through whispering; (2) this term is used as another name for 
the Ghagyuba School, the School of Marpa and Milarepa. 
9 Experience (T.T.: J'lams.) and Reali1.ation (T.T.: rTogs.): These two words, 
J'lams. and rTogs., are difficult to translate into adequate English. J'lams is the indirect, incomplete, imperfect, and "half-opaque" experience and understanding that 
the yogi attains in meditation; while rTogs (Realization) is the direct, complete, 
clear, and perfect experience. The former is similar to Enlightenment, while the latter is the real Enlightenment. J'lams is like the experience of a traveler approaching a city who sees the city as a whole, but has not yet reached it; nevertheless, 
he gets an over-all picture and impression. However, Realization (rTogs.) of the 
city comes when he is in the city and knows what it really is at first hand. 
I 0 This means, "Do not unscrupulously take the offerings of the relatives of 
a deceased person." 
11 "Accumulation of Merits" (T.T.: Tshogs.bSags.) is a frequently used Buddhist term that can be explained in a variety of ways. Generally it means all the virtuous and spiritual practices. Specifically, in Mahayana Buddhism, it denotes the 
first five Paramit1is of the Bodhisattva, i.e., charity, discipline, patience, diligence, 
and meditation. See Story 9, Note 8. 
12 Corresponding and actual Realization (T.T.: J'lams.rTogs.): Realization 
or Englightenment brought about in meditation usually follows a sequence: the 
corresponding, or resembling Realization comes first; the actual Realization follows: 
See Note 9. 
13 Mothers: Here this term seems to imply the Mother-Divinities such as 
Tara, Dorje Paumo, Lhamo, and others. 
14 Ma~c;lala, in this case, signifies a Tantric utensil for sacramental offerings. 

--- PAGE 107 ---
The Song of a Yogi's Joy 
The original meaning of the word "Mat~9ala" is "circle" or "center"; it is a complex design of a picture that symbolizes the phenomenal world of Tantric 
Buddhas. 
15 "Corrections and remedies" here imply all the comcious efforts toward preventing or remedying "wrong-doings," which arc, in reality, not against the Illuminating Void, but rather identical with it. lllumination and Voidness are the two immanent characteristics of Mind for which no corrections or remedies arc needed. 
16 Simultaneously Born \Visdom (T.T.: Lhan.Cig.sKyes.Pahi.Ye.c;:es.): When 
one is born the \Visdom of Buddhahood is also horn with him, implying that the 
Buddha-nature is innate and exists all the time. See Story 3, Note 18. 
17 "Contact": All the sensations and perceptions are produced through contact 
of the consciousness with objects. 
18 Lit.: Beyond empty words or sophisms, away-from-playwords, or away-fromnonsense (T.T.: sPros.Bral.). All ideas, such as monism, dualism, being or non-being, 
existence or non-existence, etc.- all these conceptual notions- are equal to empty 
words, playwords, or nonsense to enlightened beings. 
19 Na9is, Prana, and Bindu (T.T.: rTsa.rLllli. [and] Thig.Le.): The Path-withForm of Tantrism emphasizes the physical practice as well as the mental practice. In order to build up a favorable condition in which the realization of transcendental Truth may easily be achieved, Tantrism provides exercises to purify the 
nervous, breathing, and excretory systems. 
20 "Ups-and-downs" here signifies the fluctuating actions and emotions in daily activity. 
21 To those who have not reached the state of the Perfect Mutual-containing, or the Non-discriminating Whole, the antithetical aspect of being, which originates from dualistic ideas, becomes the paramount obstacle that debars them from 
realizing the non-differentiated Totality. Also, it produces a belief in the incompatibility of opposites, i.e., of being and non-being, existence and non-existence, etc.-
in this case, Voidness and moral values. In certain aspects, the yogi who realizes the 
teaching of Voidness should not even see the existence of good and evil in his practice. 
22 Cotton-clad (T.T.: Ras.Pa.): The yogi who is able to produce bodily heat 
through Yoga, thus wearing only cotton clothes in severe cold weather, is called 
Repa (Ras.Pa.). 
23 This house is, of course, symbolic; but Milarepa did build many houses for 
Marpa before he was accepted by him. 
24 Ah Shea (T.T.: A.c;:ad.) Vital Heat: the heat produced in Tantric meditation. See "The Six Yogas of Naropa," in "Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines," 
edited by W_ Y. Evans-\Ventz. 
2 5 The Seven Holy Jewels are: gold, silver, crystal, ruby, coral, agate, and 
carnelian. Here Milarepa spoke of them in a figurative sense. 
26 The text is not clear here. The translator presumes that it implies the voluntary springing forth of secretion through self-suggestion, by the yogic power. 
27 Perpetual Sunyata: the eternal Voidness. 
28 Path of Two-in-One (T.T.: Lam.Zun.hJug.): A very widely used phrase in 
Tibetan Buddhism_ It means the unification of antitheses, the joining of opposing 
forces, the merging of differentiations, and the like. 
29 Patron Buddha (T.T.: Yi.Dam.): Every Tantric yogi has a chosen patron 
Buddha, who is his protector, to whom he prays, and upon whom he relies. 

--- PAGE 108 ---
MILAREPA 
AND THE PIGEON 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
I
N ACCORDANCE with the prophecy [of his Patron Buddha], Milrepa 
went to Tibet proper from Yolmo. He arrived at Gu Tang and 
lived in a cave, absorbing himself in the Meditation of the Great 
Illumination. 
One day a pigeon wearing golden ornaments came to Milarepa. 
The bird nodded, bowed, and circled him many times. Then it flew 
away in the direction of the Immaculate Rock. Milarepa understood 
that this must be a spell of the Non-men to make him welcome. So 
he followed the pigeon and went up to the hill, where he found a 
heap of white rice. The bird pecked the rice with its bill and brought 
some to Milarepa as if showing him hospitality and welcome. Milarepa, [surprised and delighted], broke into song: 
Ohl My gracious Guru, Marpa Lho Draug Wa, 
From the depth of my heart I think of you. 
In deepest earnestness I meditate on you. 
That I never be separated from you, is my prayer. 
Merging the Self-mind with the Guru is indeed 
a happy thing. 
Manifestation itself is the essence of Reality. 
Through the realization of this unborn Dharmakaya, 
I merge myself in the Realm of Non-effort,l 
To both the high and low Views2 am I indifferent. 
In the mind of Non-effort I feel happiness and joy. 
The nature of Mind is the Light and the Void. 
--- PAGE 109 ---
Milarepa and the Pigeon 
By realizing the awareness of Light-Void, 
I merge myself in the original state of Non-effort. 
To good and bad experiences am I indifferent. 
With a mind of Non-effort, I feel happiness and joy. 
The Six Senses and Sense Objects3 of themselves 
dissolve [into the Dharmadhatu]. 
Where the Non-differentiation of subject 
and object is realized. 
I merge happiness and sorrow· into one; 
I enter the original state of Non-effort. 
To right and wrong actions, am I indifferent. 
Happy indeed is the Non-effort mind. 
The very nature of the Dharmakaya 
Is identified through its myriad forms; 
The myriad forms are the Nirmai:Iakaya of Buddha. 
With this understanding in mind, 
Whatever circumstance I may encounter, 
I am free in the happy realm of Liberation! 
To return to the home of Buddha 
I have no longing! 
Happy indeed is this mind of Non-effort. 
Whereupon the pigeon, with seven companions, came nearer to 
Milarepa. They all bowed to him and circled him many times, as the 
first bird had done before. Milarepa thought, "These pigeons must 
be Non-men. I shall ask them and see whether they will tell the 
truth." So he said, "Who are you, and why do you come here?'' The 
pigeons then broke the spell and displayed their real forms as female 
Devas. Their leader said, "We are the angel-maidens of Heaven. Because we have great faith in you, we come here to learn the Dharma 
from you. We beseech you to give us the instructions." 
In response, Milarepa sang: 
Oh! The wondrous Transformation Body of my Guru! 
Pray, kindly grant me your grace-wave. 
You eight charming maidens. of Heaven, 
Who appeared just now in pigeon form, 
Your spell was fine, and in conformity 
with the Dharma! 
If you, the eight beautiful maidens of Heaven, 

--- PAGE 110 ---
Wish to practice the white Dharma of Buddha, 
Pray remember the meaning of this song. 
Though worldly happiness and pleasure 
Seem delightful and pleasing, 
They soon will pass away. 
Though high-ranking ladies are proud and exultant 
In their lofty dignity, 
What refuge and shelter do they have? 
To dwell in the fiery home of Saq1sara 
Sometimes seems pleasant, but is mostly misery. 
If a well-endowed and well-loved son 
Has no self-respect and makes no self-effort, 
His father will meet nothing but distress. 
If a disciple commits evil deeds, 
He must fall into Saq1sara, 
No matter how superb his Guru may be. 
You maidens of Heaven, the conjurers of 
the pigeons! 
It is easy for you to ask for Dharma, 
But hard to have deep faith in it. 
You should remind yourselves 
Of the inevitable misfortunes 
Connected with worldly joys. 
The pains and miseries of this life, 
You should regard as friends leading 
you toward Nirval)a. 
As for me, I am very grateful for 
The misfortunes I have met. 
Oh, my friends, bear this in mind, and do the same! 
The Devas smiled at Milarepa and said, "We shall do so." Then 
they made obeisance and circumambulated him many times. The Jetsun then asked the angels, "Why did you come here in pigeon form?" 
They replied, "You are a yogi who has not the slightest attachment 
to yourself, nor any desire for this worldly life. It is only for the 
sake of Bodhi and the welfare of sentient beings that you have remained in solitude and meditated without distraction. With our heav-

--- PAGE 111 ---
Milarepa and the Pigeon 
enly eyes,· we have been able to see you; and with respect and faith 
we now come to you for Dharma. But in order to [conceal our real 
form from] sinful beings, we have transformed ourselves into pigeons. 
We pray that your Reverence will now be kind enough to go up into 
Heaven with us to preach the righteous Dharma for us." But Milarepa 
replied, "As long as life lasts, I shall remain in this world to benefit 
sentient beings here. You must know that Heaven is far from dependable; it is not eternal, and one should not rely on it. To be born 
in Heaven is not necessarily a wonderful thing. You should pay heed 
and foiiow these instructions": 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa Lho Draug. 
Oh, Father Guru! Pray grant me your 
grace-wave and accomplishment. 
You, eight beauties of the Deva-realm, 
Have offered me white rice, the wondrous 
fruit of Dhyana. 
Eating it my body is strengthened, and my 
mind enlivened. 
As a token of my gratitude, I sing this 
song of Dharma to you. 
Now, lift up your ears, and listen to me carefully. 
Even though one reaches the highest Heaven 
of the White Devas, 4 
It has no permanent value and meaning! 
Lovable and touching are those flowers of 
youth in Heaven. 
But however pleasant it may seem to be, 
In the end comes separation. 
Although the bliss in Heaven seems to be very great, 
It is merely a deceitful mirage, a 
bewildering hallucination; 
In fact, it is the very cause of the 
return to suffering! 
Thinking of the miseries of the Six Realms in Sa111sara, 
I cannot help but have a feeling of disgust 
and aversion -
A feeling of anguish and distressed emotion! 

--- PAGE 112 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREP.'\. 
Should you intend to practice the teaching of Buddha, 
You must take refuge in the Three Precious 
Ones and pray to them. 
Sentient beings in the Six Realms 
You should consider as your parents. 
Give to the poor, and offer to the Guru! 
For the benefit of all, dedicate your merits. 
Always remember that death may come at any moment. 
Identify your body with Buddha's body! 
Identify your own voice with Buddha's Mantra. 
Contemplate the Siinyata of self-awakening Wisdom, 
And always try to be master of your mind! 
The Devas of Heaven said, "In ignorant beings like us, the Kle~as 
always follow the mind. Pray give us a teaching with which we can 
correct this fault, so we may depend upon it and practice it frequently." 
In response to their request, Milarepa sang: 
Obeisance to Marpa, the gracious one! 
Pray grant me the blessing of virtuous remedy. 
Should you, oh faithful lady Devas, intend 
to practice the Dharma often, 
Inwardly you should practice concentration 
and contemplation. 
The renunciation of external affairs is 
your adornment. 
Oh, bear in mind this remedy for external 
involvement! 
With self-composure and mindfulness, you 
should remain serene. 
Glory is the equainimity of mind and speech! 
Glory is the resignation from many actions! 
Should you meet disagreeable conditions, 
Disturbing to your mind, 
Keep watch upon yourself and be alert; 
Keep warning yourself: 

--- PAGE 113 ---
Milarepa and the Pigeon 
"The danger of anger is on its way." 
When you meet with enticing wealth, 
Keep watch upon yourself and be alert; 
Keep a check upon yourself: 
"The danger of craving is on its way." 
Should hurtful, insulting words come to your ears, 
Keep watch upon yourself and be alert, 
And so remind yourself: 
"Hurtful sounds are but delusions of the ear." 
When you associate with your friends, 
Watch carefully and warn yourself: 
"Let not jealousy in my heart arise." 
When you are plied with services and offerings, 
Be alert and warn yourself: 
"Let me beware, lest pride should spring up 
in my heart." 
At all times, in every way, keep watch upon 
yourself. 
At all times try to conquer the evil thoughts 
within you! 
Whatever you may meet in your daily doings,~ 
You should contemplate its void and 
illusory nature. 
Were even one hundred saints and scholars 
gathered here, 
More than this they could not say. 
May you all be happy and prosperous! 
May you all, with joyful hearts, 
Devote yourselves to the practice of the Dharma! 
The maidens of Heaven were all very happy, and in their delight 
and satisfaction they again turned their bodies into pigeons, and flew 
up toward Heaven. Milarepa then ate the offered rice, and set out 
for the Gray Rock Vajra Enclosure. 
This is the story of the angel-maidens [in pigeon form) and their 
offerings. 

--- PAGE 114 ---
All the preceding stories have dealt with the accounts of Milarepa's 
subjugation and conversion of demons. 
NOTES 
1 Non-effort (T.T.: rTsoi.Med.), or no action, no disturbance, no doing, 
and the like: The Non-effort or Non-doing technique of meditation is the most important teaching of Mahamudra. 
2 The high and low Views: Since the different Schools hold different views 
on Buddhist doctrine, they classify Buddhism into different groups of teachingthe high, the low, the expedient, the Ultimate. and so forth. For instance. the Yogacara School holds that the "Mind-only" doctrine is the high view and the "Void" 
doctrine of the Middle Way (Madhymika) School is the low view; the Middle 
Way School says just the opposite. This dissension also exists in other Buddhist 
Schools and Sects. 
3 Six Senses and Sense Objects (T.T.: Tsogs.Drug.): Literally, this term 
should be translated as the Six Groups; e.g., eyes and form comprise one group, ears 
and sound another, and so on. 
1 The Heaven of the White Devas: According to Buddhism, there are many 
different levels of heavens, some with form and some without. The Devas in the 
"highest" Heaven are supposedly without form or desires. However, Buddhism claims 
that even these heavenly beings are still in Samsara. 
5 Lit.: four kinds of daily activity- walking, standing, sitting, and lying 
down. 

--- PAGE 115 ---
PART TWO 
MILAREPA 
AND HIS HUMAN 
DISCIPLES 

--- PAGE 117 ---
THE GRAY ROCK 
V AJRA ENCLOSURE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
T
HE Jetsun Milarepa, having arrived at the Gray Rock Vajra Enclosure, stayed in a state of inspiration at the Saddle Cave. 
Now there was a Tantric yogi at Gu Tang who had heard the 
preaching of the Jetsun, and became imbued with a deep faith in him. 
[Coming] to Milarepa, he said, "Revered One, although I have practiced meditation for some time, I have not had the experiences or 
earned the merits [that should have resulted]. This is probably due 
to my ignorance of the proper way to practice. Pray, be kind enough 
to grant me the appropriate teachings!" Milarepa replied, "In that 
case, it is necessary that you should know all the essential points." 
Therefore he sang for him a song, "The Six Essentials": 
The manifestations of mind outnumber the 
myriads of dust-motes 
In the infinite rays of sunlight; 
The lord-like Yogi knows 
The self-nature of these manifestations. 
The reality of the true nature of beings 
Is neither produced by cause nor by conditions; 
'Qle lord-like Yogi knows 
The sole truth precisely and positively. 
Even when he is faced with the threat 
of a hundred spears, 
His thorough-knowing View will not be shaken; 
Thus the lord-like Yogi naturally subdues 
all attachments. 
--- PAGE 118 ---
The ever-moving mind is hard to tame 
Even when shut up in an iron box; 
The lord-like Yogi knows 
That all these emanations are illusions. 
The disciple then asked, "Are experiences such as you have just 
mentioned brought about gradually, or instantaneously?" Milarepa 
replied, "Well-endowed people will attain Enlightenment instantaneously; average and inferior people will gradually attain their Realizations. I shall describe to you the signs of real Enlightenment, and 
also the signs of those experiences resembling Enlightenment, but 
which are wrongly considered by some people to be the real ones." 
Thereupon he sang the following song to explain the different experiences, both real and false, of the four stages of Mahamudra,l 
I bow down at the feet of the supreme Guru. 
To cling to the actuality of mind is the 
cause of Saq1sara; 
To realize that non-clinging and illuminating 
Self-awareness 
Is unborn and immanent, 
Is the consummation sign of the 
Stage of One-Pointedness. 
If one talks about the Two-In-One 
But still meditates on form, 
If one acknowledges the truth of Karma 
But still commits wrong-doing, 
He is actually meditating with blindness 
and passion! 
Things, as such, are never found 
In the true Stage of One-Pointedness. 
In realizing that the non-clinging and 
illuminating mind, 
Is embodied in bliss and transcends all playwords,2 
One sees his mind's nature as clearly as 
great Space. 
This is the sign of the consummation 
Of the Stage of Away-from-Playwords. 
Though one talks about the Stage of 

--- PAGE 119 ---
The Gray Rock Vajra Enclosure 
Away-from-Playwords, 
Still he is declaring this and that; 
In spite of illustrating what is beyond 
· 
all words, 
Still he is but piling words on words. 
He then, is the ignorant one, 
Who with self-clinging meditates. 
In the Stage of Away-from-Playwords, 
There is no such thing as this. 
The non-diffferentiation of manifestation 
and Voidness 
Is the Dharmakaya, 
In which Saf!lsara and Nirva!)a are felt to be the same. 
It is a complete merging of Buddha and 
sentient beings. 
These are the signs of the Stage of One-Taste, 
As many have declared. 
He who says that "all is one," 
Is still discriminating; 
In the Stage of One-Taste, 
There is no such blindness. 
A wandering thought is itself the essence 
of WisdomImmanent and intrinsic. 
Cause and effect are both the same. 
This is a realization of Buddha's Three Bodies3 
Existing within oneself. 
These are the consummation signs 
Of the Stage of Non-Practice. 
When one talks about Non-Practice, 
His mind is still active; 
He talks about illumination, 
But in fact is blind. 
In the Stage of Non-Practice, 
There is no such thing! 
The disciple cried, "These instructions are indeed extraordinary! To 
help ignorant men like us, pray now, instruct us on the practice of 
the Six Paramitas." Milarepa sang in reply: 

--- PAGE 120 ---
I bow down at the feet of the perfect Jetsun Gurus. 
Property and wealth are like dew on grass; 
Knowing this, gladly should one give them away. 
It is most precious to be born a worthy and 
leisured human being;4 
Knowing this, one should with care observe 
the precepts 
As if protecting his own eyes. 
Anger is the cause of falling to the Realms Below; 
Knowing this, one should refrain from wrath, 
Even at the risk of life. 
Benefit to oneself and to others 
Can never be achieved through sloth; 
Strive, therefore, to do good deeds. 
A perturbed, wandering mind never sees the 
truth of Mahayana; 
Practice, therefore, concentration. 
Buddha cannot be found through searching; 
So contemplate your own mind.5 
Until the autumn mists dissolve into the sky, 
Strive on with faith and determination. 
Having heard this song, a great admiration and faith toward the 
Jetsun arose in the heart of the disciple, and he returned home. Seyeral days later, he and many other patrons came to entertain Milarepa, 
and brought copious offerings. They had all heard the Jetsun's life 
story, and with great faith, they came this time to learn the Dharma. 
They asked Milarepa how he had managed to undergo the trials of 
probationship6 and had exerted himself in ascetic practice, and to recount the way through which he had finally obtained his Enlightenment. Milarepa answered with "The Six Resolutions": 
When one has lost interest in this world, 
His faith and longing for the Dharma is confirmed. 
To relinquish one's home ties is very hard; 

--- PAGE 121 ---
The Gray Rock Vajra Enclosure 
Only by leaving one's native land 
Can one be immune from anger. 
It is hard to conquer burning passions 
Toward relatives and close friends; 
The best way to quench them 
Is to break all associations. 
One'never feels that he is rich enough; 
Contented, he should wear humble, cotton clothes. 
He may thus conquer much desire and craving. 
It is hard to avoid worldly attractions; 
By adhering to humbleness, 
Longing for vainglory is subdued. 
It is hard to conquer pride and egotism; 
So, like the animals, live in the mountains! 
My dear and faithful patrons! 
Such is the real understanding 
That stems from perseverance. 
I wish you all to practice deeds that 
are meaningfu),1 
And amass all merits!8 
Like space, the Dharmakaya pervades 
all sentient beings, 
Yet [Karmic] blindness drives them into Saqtsara. 
Easy it is to glimpse the Dharmakaya, 
But hard to stabilize its realization. 
Hence, one is still beset by the Five Poisons. • 
If the realization [of Siinyata] is stable, 
The organs and senses10 move freely but do not cling. 
One then forever merges with the Trikiiya. 
This is the conviction of Enlightenment. 
The Main and the Ensuing Samadhis11 
Are two states only for beginners. 
In stabilized minds they are as one. 
--- PAGE 122 ---
In the Yoga of Non-wandering,12 
The Six non-attached Senses e'er arise, 
Yet I remain steadfast in the inseparable Trikaya. 
Unattached, I walk with power; 
Free from clinging, I gain 
The wish-fulfilling merits.13 
A wise man knows how to practice 
The space-like meditation. 
In all he does by day 
He attaches himself to nothing. 
With a liberated spirit, 
He desires nor wealth nor beauty. 
One should see that all appearance 
Is like mist and fog; 
Though one has vowed to liberate all 
sentient beings, 
He should know that all manifestations 
Are like reflections of the moon in water. 
Without attachment, he knows 
That the human body is but a magic spell. 
So from all bindings he gains freedom. 
Like the immaculate lotus growing out of mud, 
He attains the conviction of Practice. 
The mind is omnipresent like space; 
It illumines all manifestations as the Dharmakaya; 
It knows all and lightens all. 
I see it clearly like a crystal 
In my palm! 
In the beginning, nothing comes; 
In the middle, nothing stays; 
At the end, nothing goes. 
Of the mind there is no arising and extinction! 
Thus, one remains in the Equality of past, 
present, and future. 
Immanent, the mind, like the sky, is pure. 
The red and white clouds14 vanish of themselves; 
No trace of the Four Elements 1 ~ can be found. 

--- PAGE 123 ---
The Gray Rock V ajra Enclosure 
The omnipresent mind resembles Space: 
It never separates from the Realm of the Unborn, 
It cuts the path of the Three Worlds of Sarpsara. 
This is the conviction of Enlightenment. 
If a yogi realizes this, 
When he leaves his mortal body 
And enters into the [momentous] Bardo,16 
He may then perfect all merits. 
With an understanding of the profound instruction. 
One makes the Mother and Son Minds17 meet; 
If he then fails to unite them, 
Through the teaching of the Simultaneously Born 
He can still transform the phantom Bardo form 
Into the Pure Body of Bliss! 
If he knows that even the Sambhogakaya is 
unreal, like a shadow, 
How can he ever go astray? 
This is infallibly my ownThe yogi's sure conviction about Bardo! 
The people of Gu Tang were all strongly confirmed in their faith, 
and thereafter often brought offerings to Milarepa. 
One day, in the very early morning, Milarepa, in a state of Illumination, saw the Vajra l)akini appear before him. She prophesied: 
"1\,lilarepa! You will have one sun-like, one moon-like, twenty-three 
star-like, and twenty-five accomplished human disciples; one hundred 
enlightened beings who never fall back; one hundred and eight great, 
men who will attain the initial Realization of the Path;18 and one 
thousand male and female yogis who will enter the Path. Those who, 
with you, have the affinity of Dharma and thus forever escape the 
lower path of Sarpsara, are beyond number. In the upper part of 
Gung Tang there is a destined man, who will be your moon-like 
disciple. Go there for his sake." And so Milarepa set his mind upon 
going to the Upper Gung Tang. 
This is the first of the series of stories of the Gray Rock Vajra 
Enclosure.19 

--- PAGE 124 ---
NOTES 
The four stages of Mahamudra are: 
(1) The stage of One-Pointedness (T.T.: rTse.gCig.), 
(2) The stage of Away-from-Playwords (T.T.: sProd.BraL), 
(3) The stage of One-Taste (T.T.: Ro.gCig.), 
(4) The stage of Non-Practice (T.T.: sCom.Med.). 
In the first stage the meditator experiences the tranquility of Mind-Essence. 
However, he still has not eradicated the dualistic view, nor has he actually realized 
in full the uncreated voidness of the mind. 
In the second stage the meditator sees clearly the "original state of mind." In 
virtue of this direct experience with Mind-Essence, he rids himself once and for all 
of Saq1saric views- the views of "playwords," such as "one and many," "good and 
bad," "yes and no," "finite and infinite," etc. This stage is considered by Tibetan 
sages to be that of initial Enlightenment. 
In the third stage the meditator is completely free from all obstacles or hin· 
drances. It is therefore called the Stage of One-Taste (the Realm of Universal To· 
tality, or the Realm of the Identity of Saq1sara and NirviiJ;Ja). However, this expe· 
rienee should by no means be regarded as a realization of any foiTJ;~ of monism -a 
major "false view," that has been refuted by many Buddhist scholars, notably those 
of the Madhyamika SchooL (See Story 18, Note 9.) 
In the fourth stage the meditator has already reached the Ultimate Realm. He 
has nothing more to look for or to learn: he has reached the State of Buddhahood. 
These four stages represent the complete process through which a Buddhist yogi 
proceeds to Ultimate Enlightenment. 
2 Playwords: All Saq1saric conceptions and ideas which have to be expressed 
through words and symbols are meaningless sophistries from the viewpoint of an en· 
lightened being. The tem1 "Playwords" (T.T.: sPros.Pa.) also implies that all Saq1· 
sa ric conceptualizations and verbalizations are on a par with children's prattlelittle more than nonsense. Realization of this is· considered the initial stage of Enlightenment. 
3 Three Bodies: the Trikaya, or Three Bodies of Buddha, i.e., the Dharmakaya, the Sambhogakaya, and the NirmaJ;Jakiiya. 
4 The human body is considered to be a precious possession, without which 
no spiritual development is possible. 
5 This sentence is extremely important as representing the essence of the 
teaching of Mahamudra. In general Buddhism one is taught to search for Enlight· 
enment and to attain Buddhahood, while in Mahamudra the Guru points out to the 
disciple that one's own mind is Buddha Himself. and therefore, to search for any· 
thing, even Buddhahood, is a waste of time. 
6 This refers to the trials imposed on Milarepa by his Guru, Marpa, before he 
was accepted for initiation. (See Milarepa's Biography, edited by W. Y. Evans· 
Wentz.) 
7 Meaningful deeds: the virtuous deeds that lead one to Enlightenment. 
8 "Amass merits": This phrase is often used by Buddhists to denote all vir· 
tuous deeds. (See Story 4, Note 22; and Story 7, Note II.) 
9 Five Poisons: the Five Kle~as, the basic causes of all miseries of Samsara. 
They are lust, hate, blindness, pride, and envy. 
· 
10 Lit.: Six Groups: a general term denoting the six outer objects, six organs, 
and six senses. 

--- PAGE 125 ---
The Gray Rock Vajra Enclosure 
11 Main Samadhi and Ensuing Samadhi (T.T.: mi'<am.bShag. [and] rJes.Tob.): 
mi'<am.bShag. may be otherwise translated as the "Actual-Meditation-State," and 
rJes.Tob. as the "After-Meditation-State." 
12 Yoga of Non-wandering: The state of concentration in which the mind is 
fixed and does not wander. 
13 If the yogi can free himself from all clinging, he will gain all the miraculous 
powers, which in turn will enable him to grant all sentient beings' wishes. 
14 "Red-and-\Vhite" denotes the positive and negative elements in the body. 
15 The text is very obscure here and the meaning is not certain. 
16 The Bardo stage, or the stage between death and rebirth, is a critical 
stage wherein one can either attain liberation easily, or fall back into Sarpsaric existence. (See Story 3, Note 4). 
17 The Mother and Son Minds: The Mother Mind, or more correctly, Mother Light (T.T.: Mahi.ljod.Zer.) exists all the time, but is not yet unfolded. The 
Son Mind (T.T.: Buhi.I_Iod.Zer.), or Son Light, is the enlightened mind, or the Enlightenment of the Path. 
18 Initial Realization of the Path: This is the first stage of Enlightenment. 
(See Note 1.) 
19 This is a literal translation of the original text. The latter part of the series 
seems to be missing. 

--- PAGE 126 ---
MILAREPA'S FIRST MEETING 
\iVITH RECHUNGPA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A s PROPHESIED by [Marpa], Milarepa went to the upper part of 
Gung Tang. When he arrived at the Castle there, he found that 
many people were building a house and asked them for some food. 
They replied, "We are working on this building. You can see that 
we are very busy and have no time for that sort of thing. It looks 
as though you have plenty of time to spare, so why don't you join us 
in the work?" 
· 
Milarepa said, "Yes, I now have plenty of leisure, but I have earned 
it by finishing the construction of my 'house' in my own way. Even if 
you do not give me any food, I will never work on a worldly building, which I would most certainly abandon." The men asked him, "How 
did you build your house, and why do you spurn our work so 
strongly?" 
Milarepa sang in reply: 
Faith is the firm foundation of my house, 
Diligence forms the high walls, 
Meditation makes the huge bricks, 
And Wisdom is the great cornerstone. 
With these four things I built my castle, 
And it will last as long as the Truth eternal! 
Your worldly houses are delusions, 
Mere prisons for the demons, 
And so I would abandon and desert them. 
The workers said, "What you have sung is most enlightening. Please 
also tell us whether, in your way of life, you have anything like our 
--- PAGE 127 ---
Milarepa's First Meeting with Rechungpa 
farms, properties, relatives, companions, wives, and children? It seems 
to us that these things are worth more than you have suggested. Please 
tell us what possessions you have that are so much better than ours? 
Why do you look upon our way of life as worthless?" 
Milarepa answered: 
The Alaya Consciousness1 is the good earth, 
The inner teaching is the seed that is sowed, 
Achievement in meditation is the sprout, 
And the Three Bodies of Buddha are the 
ripened crop. 
These are the four lasting mainstays of 
heavenly farming. 
Your worldly farming, delusive and deceiving, 
Is merely the slave-labor of the hungry; 
Without hesitation I discard it! 
The fine warehouse of Siinyata, 
The Supramundane Jewels,2 
The service and action of the Ten Virtues, 
And the great happiness of Non-outflow3 -
These four jewels are the lasting properties of Heaven. 
Your worldly jewels and possessions are 
deceiving and delusive; 
Like deceptive magic spells, they lead you astray. 
Without any hesitation, I discard them. 
The Father and Mother Buddha are my parents, 
The immaculate Dharma is my face, 
The assembly of Sangha are my cousins and nephews, 
And the guardians of Dharma are my friends. 
These four are my lasting, heavenly kinsmen. 
Your worldly kinsmen are deceitful and delusive; 
Without hesitation I throw all ephemeral 
associates away! 
The Blissful Passing• is like my father, 
The Blissful Illumination in well-done 
work is (my background], 
The Two-in-One is my glossy, lustrous skin, 
The Experiences and Realization5 are my 
glorious clothing. 

--- PAGE 128 ---
These four are my heavenly and lasting wives. 
Delusive and deceiving are your worldly companions, 
They are but temporary friends, inclined to quarrel; 
Without hesitation, I throw them all away. 
Mind-Awareness is my new-born babe, 
Experience of Meditation is my infant, 
Understanding-and-Realization is my child, 
And the grown youth who can keep the 
Doctrine is my young companion. 
These four are my lasting, heavenly sons. 
Your worldly offspring are delusive and deceitful; 
Without hesitation I throw them all away. 
I wish sincerely that I and you, the good 
folk of Gung Tang, 
Through the Karma-affinity of this conversation, 
May meet once more in the Pure Land of Oujen.8 
The villagers, strongly moved with faith, then made obeisance and 
offerings to Milarepa. Later, they all became his sincere disciples. 
After this, Milarepa went to the upper part of Goat Hill (Ra La) 
where he found Silk Cave (Zhaoo Pug). Now, there was at Goat Hill 
a youth, who in his early infancy had lost his father. He was a fine, 
intelligent boy, whom his mother and uncle jointly supported. Having 
an excellent memory, he could recite a great many stories and sermons from the Buddhist Siitras. Thus he always received many gifts 
from the people.7 One day, while herding oxen on his donkey in the 
upper part of the valley, he came upon the cave where Milarepa was 
meditating. Thinking that he heard someone singing, he got off the 
donkey, left the oxen, and approached the cave. As soon as he saw 
Milarepa, an ineffable experience of Samadhi arose within him, and 
for a moment he stood transfixed in ecstasy. (Afterwards, he became 
a Heart-Son of Milarepa-the renowned Rechung Dorje Dragpa.) 
Awakened thus from Karma, an immutable faith toward the Jetsun 
arose within the boy. He offered Milarepa all the gifts that he had acquired for his services. Then he stayed with him to learn the Dharma, 
completely forgetting his mother and uncle. Because of this, he naturally received no income, and his mother and uncle thought, "what 
has happened? [Where is he?) Have people stopped paying him?" 
With misgivings they began asking the patrons whether they had duly 
paid Rechungpa. Everybody said that he had been paid. It then 

--- PAGE 129 ---
Milarepa's First Meeting with Rechungpa 
dawned upon the uncle and mother [where the boy must be, and] that 
all the gifts must have been offered to Milarepa. They tried in every 
way to stop Rechungpa from continuing in this course, but to no 
avail. The young lad remained with Milarepa ;.nd learned the Dharma 
from him. Before long, the Experience and Realization of meditation 
grew within him. By virtue of mastering the art of Heat Yoga he was 
able to wear merely a single piece of cotton clothing, and thus earned 
the name of Rechungpa.8 
Meanwhile, Rechungpa's mother and uncle became very angry. They 
sent him a pot on which a curse had been placed.9 As a result, 
Rechungpa contracted leprosy.10 Hoping to be cured, he confined himself [in the hermitage] for meditation. 
One day, five Indian yogis arrived, to whom Rechungpa offered 
some roasted barley which had been sent by his mother and uncle. 
While the Indians were eating they exclaimed, "What a deadly disease! What a deadly disease!" They knew that Rechungpa had caught 
leprosy. Rechungpa then asked them whether there was any cure. One 
of the yogis said, "You are indeed a pitiful person deserving of sympathy, and I feel for you. I have a Guru called Wala Tsandra who 
may be able to relieve you. As he will not be coming to Tibet, you 
will have to go to India." And so Rechungpa asked the Jetsun for permission to go. Milarepa agreed and sang as a parting gift: 
I pray my Guru to whom I owe immense gratitude, 
I pray you to protect and bless my son, Rechungpa. 
Son, you should renounce the world, 
And work hard at the Dharma. 
To the Guru, Patron Buddha,11 and the Three 
Precious Ones, 
You should pray with sincere heart and not 
just words. 
Bear this in mind when you travel in India. 
By taking the food of Perseverance in Samadhi, 
By wearing the clothes of Ah Tung,12 
And by riding the horse of the magic 
Pral)a-Mind,13 
'Thus, my son, should you travel in India. 
You should always keep the non-defiled mind clean; 
You should always remember the silver-bright 
mirror of the Tantric Precept, 

--- PAGE 130 ---
llO 
And observe it without vexation. 
Bear this in mind, my son, as you travel in India. 
If you are followed and captured by bandits, 
You should remind yourself how worthless 
are the Eight Worldly Claims.H 
Conceal your powers and merits. 
With a humble and merry mind travel in India. 
My son, with my sincere prayer and blessing, 
May you recover from your illness and enjoy long life. 
Milarepa then resumed his meditation in the cave. Rechungpa 
closed the cave's mouth with clay, and set out for India with the 
yogis. [Upon arriving] there, he met Lama Wala Tsandra, who [consented to give] him the complete teachings of the Wrathful Thunderbolt-Holder with Eagle Wings.15 By practicing this for some time 
Rechungpa was cured. 
When he returned to Tibet and reached Happy Valley, he inquired 
of the whereabouts of the Jetsun from a native of that valley who 
said, "Some time ago, I heard that there was a yogi called Mila, but 
I have heard nothing about him recently." Hearing this, Rechungpa 
became very disturbed. He thought, "Is my Guru dead?", and in great 
distress he proceeded to Silk Cave. He saw that the clay wall with 
which he had blocked the entrance was still there. Thinking, "I wonder if the Jetsun is dead inside," he tore down the wall and entered. 
Seeing Milarepa sitting upright in meditation, he felt extremely happy 
and relieved. He asked the Jetsun about his health and welfare. In 
answer Milarepa [arose from meditation and] sang: 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa, the Gracious One. 
Because I have left my kinsmen, I am happy; 
Because I have abandoned attachment to my 
country, I am happy; 
Since I disregard this place, I am happy; 
As I do not wear the lofty garb of priesthood, 
I am happy; 
Because I cling not to house and family, I am happy; 
I need not this or that, so I am happy. 
Because I possess the great wealth of Dharma, 
I am happy; 

--- PAGE 131 ---
Milarepa's First Meeting with Rechungpa 
Because I worry not about property, 
I am happy; 
Because I have no fear of losing anything, 
I am happy; 
Since I never dread exhaustion, I am happy; 
Having fully realized Mind-Essence, 
I am happy; 
As I need not force myself to please my patrons, 
I am happy; 
Having no fatigue nor weariness, I am happy; 
As I need prepare for nothing, I am happy; 
Since all I do complies with Dharma, 
I am happy; 
Never desiring to move, I am happy. 
As the thought of death brings me no fear, 
I am happy; 
Bandits, thieves, and robbers ne'er molest me, 
So at all times I am happy! 
Having won the best conditions for Dharma 
practice, I am happy; 
Having ceased from evil deeds and left off 
sinning, I am happy; 
Treading the Path of Merits, I am happy; 
Divorced from hate and injury, I am happy; 
Having lost all pride and jealousy, 
I am happy; 
Understanding the wrongness of the Eight 
Worldly Winds,16 I am happy; 
Absorbed in quiet and evenmindedness, I am happy; 
Using the mind to watch the mind, I am happy; . 
Without hope or fear, I am ever happy. 
In the sphere of non-clinging Illumination, 
I am happy; 
The Non-distinguishing Wisdom of Dharmadhatu 
itself is happy; 
Poised in the natural realm of Immanence, 
I am happy; 
In letting the Six Groups of Consciousness go by 
To return to their original nature, 
I am happy. 
The five radiant gates of sense all make me happy; 
To stop a mind that comes and goes is happy; 
Oh, I have so much of happiness and joy! 
--- PAGE 132 ---
This is a song of gaiety I sing, 
This is a song of gratitude to my Guru and 
the Three Precious Ones1 want no other happiness. 
Through the grace of Buddhas and the Gurus, 
Food and clothes are provided by my patrons. 
With no bad deeds and sins, I shall be 
joyful when I die; 
With all good deeds and virtues, I am happy 
while alive. 
Enjoying Yoga, I am indeed most happy. 
But how are you Rechungpa? Is your wish 
fulfilled? 
Rechungpa said to Milarepa, "I am well again. I have obtained 
what I wanted. From now on I would like to remain in solitude and 
stay near you. Please be so kind as to grant me further inner teachings." Milarepa then imparted to Rechungpa additional instructions, 
and stayed with him in the Silk Cave. Through the continued practice 
of meditation Rechungpa attained the perfect Experiences and Realization. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting his Heart-Son Rechungpa in 
the Cave of Zhaoo. 
NOTES 
l Alaya means store or reservoir. The main function of this consciousness 
is to preserve the "seeds" of mental impressions. Without it, memory and learning 
would become impossible. Alaya consciousness is also called the primordial con· 
sciousness, or the "Fruit-bearing Consciousness." In some aspects, it is quite 
similar to Jung's "Collective Unconscious." 
Z Supramundane Jewels: a symbolic term which denotes the transcendental 
merits and virtues of Buddha. 
3 Non-outflow (T.T.: Zag.Med.) means non-desire. The term usually deriotes 
the realm of transcendency. 
4 The Blissful Passing: This may be otherwise rendered as "The Blissful Mani· 
festation or Becoming." When one reaches a higher level of consciousness, even the 
contacts with outer manifestations become blissful. 
5 See Story 7, Notes 9 and 12. 

--- PAGE 133 ---
Milarepa's First Meeting with Rechungpa 
6 Oujen (T.T.: Ao.rGyan.): the name of the Pure Land of Padma Sa~pb­
hava. 
7 Tibetans are very generous in offering Lamas and story-tellers gifts for 
their services in reciting Buddhist S('!tras and relating Buddhist legends. 
8 Rechungpa: the chief and closest disciple of Milarepa, who served and 
lived with Milarepa for most of his life. Since he was the youngest disciple, he was 
called Rechungpa, meaning the little Repa. 
9 A pot cursed by a malignant spell. 
10 Lit.: the disease of the Earth Lord, or the disease of the Dragon. Tibetans 
believe that leprosy is a disease caused by malignant, metamorphic dragons. 
11 Yidham (T.T.: Yi.Dam.): See Story 7, Note 29. 
12 Ah Tung (T.T.: A.Thmi.): the small seed-syllable "Ah" which is visualized 
at the navel center in the Heat-Yoga practice. Sec "The Six Yogas of Niiropa," in 
Evans-Wentz' "Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines," and the translator's "Teachings 
of Tibetan Yoga." 
13 Pra~a-Mind: See Story 3, Note 2. 
14 Eight Worldly Claims, or Eight Worldly Winds or Desires: See Story 1, 
Note 13. 
15 The Wrathful Thunderbolt·Holder with Eagle Wings (T.T.: Phyag.rDor. 
gTum.Po.Khyun.gc:;og.Can.). 
16 See Note 14. 

--- PAGE 134 ---
ADMONISHMENT ON THE 
"RARE OPPORTUNITY OF 
PRACTICING DHARMA" 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
F
ROM Zhaoo, the Jetsun Milarepa went to the Light Cave of Runpu 
and remained there for some time. One day, some young men 
from his native country came to visit him. They said, "In the past 
you destroyed all your enemies for revenge, and now you are practicing the Dharma in such an outstanding way. This is indeed marvelous 
and extraordinary! When we are near you we cannot help but feel 
like devoting ourselves to religion; but when we return home, we again 
become preoccupied with worldly affairs. How can we correct this?" 
Milarepa replied, "If one is really determined to free himself from 
the sufferings of Saq1sara, such as birth, old age, illness, death, and 
so on, he will have peace of mind all the time and will not need 
to make any effort. Otherwise he should bear in mind that the sufferings in a future life could be much more durable and long-lasting 
than those in this life; and the burden could also be much heavier. 
It is therefore of paramount importance to take -steps to prepare for 
the next life. 
"Please hearken, and I will sing a song for you." 
We sentient beings moving in the world 
Float down the flowing stream 
Of the Four sufferings.1 
Compared to this, how much more formidable 
Are the unceasing future lives in Saq1siira. 
Why not, then, prepare a boat for the "crossing"? 
--- PAGE 135 ---
Admonishment on the "Rare Opportunity of Practicing Dharma" 115 
The state of our future lives is far more fearful 
And deserving of far more concern 
Than are the dreadful demons, ghosts, and Yama. 
So why not prepare for yourself a guide? 
Even the dread passions-craving, hatred and blindnessAre not so fearful as the state of our 
(unknown] future, 
So why not prepare for yourself an antidote? 
Great is the kingdom of the Three Realms 
of Sarpsara, 
But greater is the endless road of birfh-and-death, 
So why not prepare for yourself provisions? 
It will be better that you practice Dharma 
If you have no assurance in yourselves. 
The young men said, "Your admonishment is very helpful. We will 
come and practice the Dharma with you. However, as it makes no 
sense to punish oneself by practicing the extreme ascetic way of 
living, we beg you, for the sake of protecting the resources of your 
patrons and disciples, to keep for yourself a tiny share of belongings as 
a token. Also, we do not quite understand what you have just said 
in your song. Please make it clearer." 
In reply Milarepa sang: 
Reliance on a qualified Guru is the 
guide to Sarpsara and NirviiQa; 
Unsparing charity provides for the journey; 
As the rising moon shines brightly in the darkness, 
The real experiences in meditation 
[enlighten one's mind]. 
This is the companionship 
One should search for as a guide. 
To give accumulated wealth for the cause of Dharma 
Prepares one's boat for Saq1sara's stream. 
Holding the View without sectarian bigotry, 
One can meditate without distraction. 
If action accords with Buddhist teaching 
Precept is clear, and the Guru pleased. 
The reward is to die without regret. 

--- PAGE 136 ---
Kinsmen, patrons, and disciples 
Mean nought to me, the Yogi; 
Only you worldly beings need them. 
Fame, grandeur, and honor 
Mean nought to me, the Yogi. 
Pursuers of the Eight Desires need them. 
Property, goods, and social life 
Mean nought to me, the Yogi. 
Pursuers of fame require them. 
Tidiness, washing, and sanitation, 
Mean nought to me, the Yogi. 
Never do I want them. 
They are what you young men need. 
These twelve things do not concern me. 
[I know well] that it is not everyone 
Who can practice all these things; 
But you young men assembled here, 
Remember the "boastful talk" of this old man! 
If you want happiness in life 
Practice, then, the Dharma, 
Renounce distractions, and remain in solitude. 
Cling to the hermitage with perseverance. 
Yearn for Buddhahood and your fortitude will grow. 
You will then vanquish the Four Demons. 
Among the youths was a well-gifted, most intelligent, hard-working, 
and compassionate young man. He said to Milarepa, "My Guru, it is 
solely because we have been attached to the affairs of this life that 
we have neglected to look after our destiny in future lives. Please 
accept us as your servants. We shall renounce this life and devote 
ourselves to the preparation for our future lives. [In this light] please 
be kind enough to give us some further instructions." 
"A human body, free and opportune, is as precious as a jewel," 
replied Milarepa, "and to have a chance to practice the Dharma is 
likewise very rare. Also, to find one serious Buddhist in a hundred 
is difficult! Considering the difficulties of meeting the right Gurus, and 
other necessary favorable conditions for practicing Buddhism, you 
should deem yourselves very fortunate that you have now met all 

--- PAGE 137 ---
Admonishment on the "Rare Opportunity of Practicing Dharma" 117 
these requirements. Do not, therefore, [waste them], but practice the 
Dharma." 
Milarepa then sang: 
To escape from the Eight Non-Freedoms2 is hard, 
As it is to gain the human form, free and opportune. 
To realize the sorrows of Sarpsara 
And to seek NirvaQa is difficult! 
Out of one hundred seekers of Bodhi, it is 
hard to find 
One who may attain the pure and favorable conditions! 
To renounce the pleasures of this life is hard, 
As it is to make full use of the gem-like human body. 
Slight is the chance to meet a compassionate. Guru 
\Vho knows the traditional and expedient3 
inner Teachings. 
A sincere and faithful disciple 
With ability to practice Dharma, is most rare: 
To find a temple without fear 
And commotion is most hard. 
To find a congenial companion, whose Views 
Practice, and School agree with you, is rare. 
To attain a body without pain and sickness, 
Able to endure hard practice, is difficult! 
Even when you have fulfilled all these conditions, 
It is still hard to concentrate on meditation! 
These are the nine hard conditions; 
However formidable and exacting they may be, 
With determination and practice one can 
conquer them. 
Having heard this admonishment, the young man could not but 
develop a very strong faith in the Jetsun. He devoted himself to serve 

--- PAGE 138 ---
Milarepa, who gave him the lnitations and Instructions. Later he 
became a well-accomplished yogi and attained Liberation. He was 
known as Milarepa's intimate son-disciple, Tsapu Repa. 
This is the story of Tsapu Repa meeting Milarepa m the Great 
Light Cave. 
NOTES 
1 Four Sufferings: those of birth, of age, of sickness, and of death. 
2 The Eight Non-Freedoms (T.T.: Mi.Khom.brGyad.) are the eight conditions in which it is difficult to receive and practice Dharma: in the hells; as hungry ghosts or animals; in Uttarakuru (the legendary "Northern Continent" 
where all is pleasant); in the heavens (where life is long and easy); as deaf, blind, 
and dumb; as a worldly philosopher; and in the intermediate period between a 
Buddha and his successor. 
3 A qualified Guru should be able to give not only the tr::ditional teachings 
of the Pharma, but also the appropriate or expedient teachings for the individual 
disciple. But literally, this line should be translated as: "Who knows the essential 
instructions of Siitra and of Reasoning" (T.T.: Luii. [and] Rig.Pa.). 

--- PAGE 139 ---
THE SHEPHERD'S 
SEARCH FOR MIND 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
NE day, Jetsun Milarepa descended from the Great Light Cave to 
the Happy Village of Mang Yul for food and alms. Seeing many 
people in the center of the village, he said to them, "Dear patrons, 
please give me some food this morning." They asked, "Are you the 
much-talked-about yogi who formerly resided at Ragma?" He replied, 
"Yes, I am_" Then a great respect for him arose within them and they 
cried, "Oh, here comes the wonderful yogi!" 
Among them was a married couple who had no children. Inviting 
Milarepa to their house, they served him and said, "Dear Lama, where 
are your home and relatives?" Milarepa replied, "I am a poor beggar 
who has disavowed his relatives and native land and has also been 
forsaken by them." Then the couple cried, "In that case we would 
like to adopt you into our family! We have a good strip of land which 
we can give you; you can then marry an attractive woman, and soon 
you will have relatives." Milarepa replied, "I have no need of these 
things, and will tell you why": 
Home and land at first seem pleasant; 
But they are like a rasp filing away one's 
body, word, and mind! 
How toilsome ploughing and digging can become! 
And when the seeds you planted never 
sprout, you have worked for nought! 
In the end it becomes a land of miserydesolate and unprotectedA place of Hungry Spirits, and of haunting ghosts! 
When I think of the warehouse 
For storing sinful deeds, 
--- PAGE 140 ---
It gnaws at my heart; 
In such a prison of transciency I will not stay, 
I have no wish to join your family! 
The married couple said, "Please do not talk like that! We will find 
you a fine girl from a prominent family, who is fit to be your bride 
and who will suit your taste. Please consider this." Milarepa sang: 
At first, the lady is like a heavenly angel; 
The more you look at her, the more you want to gaze. 
Middle-aged, she becomes a demon with a 
corpse's eyes; 
You say one word to her and she shouts back two. 
She pulls your hair and hits your knee, 
You strike her with your staff, but back 
she throws a ladle. 
At life's end, she becomes an old cow with 
no teeth. 
Her angry eyes bum with a devilish fire 
Penetrating deep into your heart! 
I keep away from women to avoid fights and 
quarrels. 
For the young bride you mentioned, I have 
no appetite. 
The husband then said, "Dear Lama, it is true that when one 
grows old and close to death he has not the same capacity for enjoying life or for being pleasant as when he was young. But if I have 
no son, my grief and disappointment will be unbearable. How about 
you? Don't you need a son at all?" Milarepa sang in reply: 
In youth, a son is like the Prince of Heaven; 
You love him so much that the passion is 
hard to bear. 
In middle age, he becomes a ruthless creditor 
To whom you give all, but he still wants more. 
Driven from the house are his own parents, 
Invited in is his beloved, charming lady. 
His father calls, but he will not answer; 
His mother cries out, but he will not listen. 
Then the neighbors take advantage, spreading 
lies and rumors. 

--- PAGE 141 ---
The Shepherd's Search for Mind 
Thus I learned that one's child oft becomes 
one's enemy. 
Bearing this in mind, I renounce the 
fetters of Saqtsara. 
For sons and nephews I have no appetite. 
Both husband and wife agreed with him, replying, "What you have 
said is indeed true. Sometimes one's own son becomes an enemy. 
Perhaps it would be better to have a daughter. What do you think?" 
In answer Milarepa sang: 
In youth, a daughter is like a smiling, 
heavenly angel; 
She is more attractive and precious than are jewels. 
In middle age, she is good for nothing. 
Before her father, she openly carries things away; 
She pilfers secretly behind her mother's back. 
If her parents do not praise her and satisfy 
her wants, 
They will suffer from her bitterness and temper. 
In the end, she becomes red-faced and wields 
a sword. 
At her best, she may serve and devote herself 
to others; 
At her worst, she will bring mishaps and disaster. 
Woman is always a trouble-maker; 
Bearing this in mind, one should avoid 
irretrievable misfortunes. 
For women, the primary source of suffering, 
I have no appetite. 
The husband and wife then said, "One may not need sons and 
daughters, but without relatives, life would be too miserable and helpless. Is that not so?" 
Milarepa again sang: 
At first, when a man greets his relatives, 
He is happy and joyful; with enthusiasm 
He serves, entertains, and talks to them. 
Later, they share his meat and wine. 
He offers something to them once, they may 
reciprocate. 

--- PAGE 142 ---
In the end, they cause anger, craving, and 
bitterness; 
They are a fountain of regret and unhappiness. 
With this in mind, I renounce pleasant and 
sociable friends; 
For kinsmen and neighbors, I have no appetite. 
The couple then said, "Indeed, you may not need kinsmen. However, since we own a great deal of property, would you like to have 
and take care of it?" Milarepa replied, "As the sun and moon never 
stop to brighten one small place, so I devote myself to the welfare of 
all sentient beings. I cannot, therefore, become a member of your 
family. By merely beholding me, both of you will be benefited in this 
and future lives. I will also make a wish that we may meet in the 
Pure Land of Oujen." 
Milarepa then burst into another song: 
Wealth, at first, leads to self-enjoyment, 
Making other people envious. 
However much one has, one never feels it is enough, 
Until one is bound by the miser's demon; 
It is then hard to spend it on virtuous deeds. 
Wealth provokes enemies and stirs up ghosts. 
One works hard to gather riches which others 
will spend; 
In the end, one struggles for life and death. 
To amass wealth and money invites enemies; 
So I renounce the delusions of Sarpsara. 
To become the victim of deceitful devils, 
I have no appetite. 
These songs gave the couple unshakable faith in Milarepa and they 
gave away all their possessions for the sake of the Dharma. They began to practice the Jetsun's teachings and were forever released from 
falling into the three lower Realms. When they died, they entered 
the Path [of Bodhi] and step by step approached Buddhahood. 
After this, the Jetsun returned to the Bodhi Cave of Ragma. His 
former patrons gave their services and offerings to him, and he remained-there in an inspired mood. 
One day, two young shepherds came to him. The younger one asked, 
"Dear Lama, have you a companion?" 
Milarepa replied, "Yes, I have." 

--- PAGE 143 ---
The Shepherd's Search for Mind 
"Who is he?" 
"His name is 'Friend Bodhi-Heart'." 
"Where is he now?" 
"In the House of the Universal Seed Consciousness."1 
"What do you mean by that?" 
"My own body." 
The elder boy then said, "Lama, we had better go, as you cannot 
guide us." But the younger one said, "Do you mean this Consciousness 
is mind itself, and that the physical body is the house of the mind?" 
"Yes, that is correct." 
The boy continued, "We know that although a house usually belongs only to one person, many people can enter it, so we always 
find a number of people living in one house. In the same way, is 
there only one mind in the body, or are there many? If there are 
many, how do they live together?" 
"Well, as to whether there is only one mind in the body or many, 
you had better find that out by yourself." 
"Revered One, I will try." 
At this point, the boys took their leave and went home. Next morning, the younger boy returned and said to Milarepa, "Dear Lama, 
last night I tried to find out what my mind is and how it works. I 
observed it carefully and found that I have only one mind. Even 
though one wants to, one cannot kill this mind. However much one 
wishes to dismiss it, it will not go away. If one tries to catch it, it 
cannot be grasped; nor can it be held by pressing it. If you want it 
to remain, it will not stay; if you release it, it will not go. You try 
to gather it; it cannot be picked up. You try to see it; it cannot be 
seen. You try to understand it; it cannot be known. If you think it 
is an existing entity and cast it off, it will not leave you. If you 
think that it is non-existent, you feel it running on. It is something illuminating, aware, wide-awake, yet incomprehensible. In short, it is 
hard to say what the mind really is. Please be kind enough to explain the meaning of the mind." 
In response, Milarepa sang: 
Listen to me, dear shepherd, the protector 
[of sheep)! 
By merely hearing about sugar's taste, 
Sweetness cannot be experienced; 
Though one's mind may understand 
What sweetness is, 
It cannot experience directly; 
Only the tongue can know it. 

--- PAGE 144 ---
In the same way one cannot see in full 
the nature of mind, 
Though he may have a glimpse of it 
If it has been pointed out by others.2 
If one relies not on this one glimpse, 
But continues searching for the nature of mind, 
He will see it fully in the end. 
Dear shepherd, in this way you should observe 
your mind. 
The boy then said, "In that case, please give me the Pointing-outInstruction,3 and this evening I will look into it. I shall return tomorrow and tell you the result." Milarepa replied, "Very well. When 
you get home, try to find out the color of the mind. Is it white, red, 
or what? What is its shape? Is it oblong, round, or what? Also, try 
to locate where in your body it dwells." 
The next morning when the sun rose, the shepherd drove the sheep 
before him, and came to Milarepa, who asked, "Did you try last night 
to find out what the mind is like?" The boy replied, "Yes, I did." 
"What does it look like?" 
"Well, it is limpid, lucid, moving, unpredictable, and ungraspable; 
it has no color or shape. When it associates with the eyes, it sees; 
when with the ear, it hears; when with the nose, it smells; when with 
the tongue, it tastes and talks; and when with the feet it walks. If 
the body is agitated, the mind, too, is stirred. Normally the mind 
directs the body; when the body is in good condition, the mind can 
command it at will, but when the body becomes old, decayed, or 
bereft, the mind will leave it behind without a thought as one throws 
away a stone after cleaning oneself. The mind is very realistic and 
adaptable. On the other hand, the body does not remain quiet or 
submissive, but frequently gives trouble to the mind. It causes suffering and pain until the mind loses its self-control. At night in the state 
of sleep the mind goes away; it is indeed very busy and hard-working. 
It is clear to me that all my sufferings are caused by it [the mind]." 
The Jetsun then sang: 
Listen to me, young shepherd. 
The body is between the conscious and 
unconscious state, 
While the mind is the crucial and decisive factor! 
He who feels sufferings in the lower Realms, 
Is the prisoner of Sarpsara, 
Yet it is the mind that can free you from Sarpsara. 

--- PAGE 145 ---
The Shepherd's Search for Mind 
Surely you want to reach the other shore? 
Surely you long for the City of Well-Being 
and Liberation? 
If you desire to go, dear child, I can show 
The way to you and give you the instructions. 
The shepherd replied, "Certainly, dear Lama, I have made up my 
mind to seek it." Milarepa then asked, "What is your name?" 
"Sangje Jhap." 
"How old are you?" 
"Sixteen." 
Thereupon the Jetsun gave him the teaching of "Taking Refuge,"• 
explaining briefly its benefits and significance. He then said, "When 
you get back home this evening, do not stop reciting the Prayer; and 
in the meantime try to find out which takes refuge, the mind or the 
body. Tell me the result tomorrow." 
The next morning the shepherd came and said to Milarepa. "Dear 
Lama, last night I tried to find out which of these two takes refuge, 
the body or the mind. I found that it is neither of them. [I observed 
the body first.] Each part, from the head down to the toes, has a 
name. I asked myself, 'Is it the body as a whole which takes refuge?' 
It cannot be so, for when the mind leaves the body, the latter no 
longer exists. People then call it a 'corpse,' and certainly it cannot be 
called a 'refuge-seeker.' Furthermore, when it disintegrates, it ceases 
to be a corpse; therefore, it cannot be the body which takes refuge 
in Buddha. I then asked myself, 'Is it the mind that takes refuge?' 
But the refuge-seeker cannot be the mind, as the latter is only the 
mind and nothing else. If one says that the present mind is the [real] 
mind, and the succeeding one is the one which takes refuge, there will 
be two minds; and names for both, such as the 'present mind,' and 
the 'future mind' should then be given them. Besides, when the act 
of 'Refuge-seeking' takes place, both the present and succeeding 
minds have passed away! If one says both take refuge, then the mind 
will (become something immutable] which never (grows] or ceases 
to be. If that is so, then in all the lives of the past and future in the 
Six Realms of Sarpsara, we need nothing but this 'Refuge-seeker.' But 
I cannot remember anything in my past life; nor do I know what 
will take place in my future one. The mind of last year and yesterday are gone; that of tomorrow has not yet come; the present flowing one does not stay. Pray, my teacher, please give me an explanation! I submit everything to you; you know everything, you know 
what I need!" 
In answer to his request, Milarepa sang: 

--- PAGE 146 ---
I sincerely pray to my Guru 
Who realized the truth of Non-ego, 
I pray with body, words, and mind; 
I pray with great faith and sincerity. 
Pray bless me and my disciples, 
Enable us to realize the Truth of Non-ego! 
Pity us and deliver us from the plight of 
ego-clinging! 
Listen carefully, dear shepherd. 
Clinging to the notion of ego is 
characteristic of this consciousness. 
If one looks into this consciousness itself, 
He sees no ego; of it nothing is seen! 
If one can practice the teaching of Mahamudra 
And knows how to see nothing, something will 
be seen. 
To practice the teaching of Mahamudra 
One needs great faith, humility, and zeal 
as the Foundation.5 
One should understand the truth of Karma 
and Causation as the Path.6 
In order to achieve the Accomplishment,7 
one should depend upon a Guru 
For the Initiation, Instruction, and Inner Teaching. 
It requires a disciple possessing merit8 
to receive the teaching; 
It requires a man who disregards discomfort 
and suffering; 
It requires the courage of fearlessness, 
the defiance of death! 
Dear shepherd, can you do these things? 
If so, you are well-destined; 
If not, it is better not to talk about the subject. 
This ask yourself, and think carefully. 
When you sought the "I" [last night] you 
could not find it. 
This is the practice of Non-ego of Personality. 
If you want to practice the Non-ego of Existence,8 

--- PAGE 147 ---
The Shepherd's Search for Mind 
Follow my example and for twelve years meditate. 
Then you will understand the nature of Mind. 
Think well on this, dear boy! 
The shepherd said, "I offer you my body and my head. Please 
make me understand my own mind definitely and clearly." The Jetsun thought, "I shall see whether this child can really practice," and 
then he said, "First pray to the Three Precious Ones, then visualize 
an image of Buddha in front of your nose." Thus Milarepa gave the 
shepherd the instruction of concentration and sent him away. 
There was no sign of the boy for seven days. On the seventh day; 
his father came to Milarepa, saying, "Dear Lama, my son has not 
come home for a week. This is very unusual. Wondering whether he 
was lost, I inquired of the other shepherds who had been with him. 
They all said that he had come to you for the Dharma, and thought 
he had then gone home. But where is he?" "He was here," replied 
Milarepa, "but has not come back now for seven days." 
The father was deeply grieved and wept bitterly as he left Milarepa. 
Many people were then sent out to search for the boy. Finally, they 
found him in a clay pit sitting upright with his eyes wide open staring straight in front. They asked him, "\Vhat are you doing here?'' 
He replied, "I am practicing the meditation my Guru taught me." "Then 
why have you not returned home for seven days?" "I have only been 
meditating a little while, you must be joking!" As he said this, he 
looked at the sun and found that it was earlier than the time he had 
started to meditate. In his bewilderment he asked, "What has happened?" 
From that day on, the boy's family had great difficulty with him, 
because he had almost completely lost the notion of time. What appeared to him to have been only one day, was the passing of four 
or five days to others. l\1any times his parents sent people out to 
search for him. Thus both he and his family began to feel miserable. 
At this juncture they asked him whether he wanted to live with Milarepa for good. He said that he would like nothing better. So they 
provided him with food and sent him to the Teacher. 
Milarepa first gave him the Precepts of Five Virtues,10 preached 
the doctrine of Dharma, and then granted him the teaching of the 
Innate-born Wisdom.11 Through practice, the boy gradually attained 
good meditation experience and l'vlilarepa was very pleased. [In order, 
however, to clarify the boy's misapprehension on the nature of true 
Realization], he sang: 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa, 
He who received grace from Naropa and Medripa. 

--- PAGE 148 ---
Those who practice the Dharma with their mouths 
Talk much and seem to know much teaching, 
But when the time comes for the perceiver to 
leave the deadened body, 
The mouth-bound preacher into space is thrown. 
When the Clear Light12 shines, it is cloaked 
by blindness; 
The chance to see the Dharmakaya at the time 
of death 
Is lost through fear and confusion. 
Even though one spends his life in studying 
the Canon, 
It helps not at the moment of the mind's departure. 
Alas! Those proficient yogis who long 
have practiced meditation 
Mistake the psychic experience of illumination 
For Transcendental Wisdom, 
And are happy with this form of self-deception.13 
Therefore when at death the Transcendental 
Wisdom of the Dharmakaya shines, 
These yogis cannot unify the Light of 
Mother-and-Son. 14 
Since meditation cannot help them as they die, 
They are still in danger of rebirth in 
lower Realms.l5 
My dear son, best of laymen, listen to me carefully! 
When your body is rightly posed, and your 
mind absorbed deep in meditation, 
You may feel that thought and mind both disappear; 
Yet this is but the surface experience of Dhyana. 
By constant practice and mindfulness thereon, 
One feels radiant Self-awareness shining like 
a brilliant lamp. 
It is pure and bright as a flower, 
It is like the feeling of staring 
Into the vast and empty sky. 
The Awareness of Voidness is limpid and 
transparent, yet vivid. 

--- PAGE 149 ---
The Shepherd's Search for Mind 
This Non-thought, this radiant and transparent 
experience 
Is but the feeling of Dhyiina. 
With this good foundation 
One should further pray to the Three Precious Ones, 
And penetrate to Reality by deep thinking 
and contemplation.16 
He thus can tie the Non-ego Wisdom 
With the beneficial life-rope of deep Dhyiina. 
With the power of kindness and compassion, 
And with the altruistic vow of the Bodhi-Heart, 
He can see direct and clear 
The truth of the Enlightened Path, 
Of which nothing can be seen, yet all is 
clearly visioned. 
He sees how wrong were the fears and hopes 
of his own mind. 
Without arrival, he reaches the place of Buddha; 
Without seeing, he visions the Dharmakaya; 
Without effort, he does all things naturally. 
Dear son, the Virtue-seeker, bear this instruction in your mind. 
Milarepa then gave the boy the complete Initiation and verbal instructions. After practicing them, the boy attained superlative Experience and Realization. He was known as one of the "Heart-Sons" of 
the Jetsun, Repa Sangje Jhap. 
This is the story of Milarepa's second visit to Ragma, and of his 
meeting with Repa Sangje Jhap. 
NOTES 
l This is another name for the Alaya Consciousness. See Story 4, Note 38. 
2 Lit.: "Through the 'Pointing-out-Instruction' one may glimpse it." The 
Pointing-out-Instruction (T.T.: I'lo.sProd.) is an essential practice of Mahamud· 
ra. The main concern of Mahamudra is the unfoldment of the essence of one's 
mind. To accomplish this, the disciple is given by his Guru the "Pointing-out" 
demonstration. This can be done in different ways with different gestures- a 
smile, a blow, a push, a remark, etc. This is strikingly similar to the tradition of Zen, 
though the style and process appear somewhat different. 

--- PAGE 150 ---
3 See Note 2. 
4 "Taking Refuge" (T.T.: sKyabs.hGro.): This is the basic and universal 
prayer of all Buddhists. It reads: "I take refuge in the Buddha, I take refuge in the 
Dharma, I take refuge in the Sangha." 
5, 6, 7 Foundation, Path, and Accomplishment (T.T.: gShi, Lam, hBres.Bu.): 
These three terms are frequently used in Buddhist Tantric texts. They have various 
meanings and uses. Generally speaking, the "Foundation" (gShi.) implies the basic 
principles of Buddhism; the "Path" (Lam.) is the practice, or way of action which 
is in conformity with the principles of the "Foundation"; and the "Accomplishment" (hBres.Bu.), otherwise translated as "Fruit," is the full realization of the 
principles of the Foundation. For example, the Foundation of the teaching of 
Mahamudra is the view that the innate Buddha-nature is within all sentient beings, 
without which no sentient being could possibly become Buddha regardless of how 
hard he attempted to practice the Dharma. "Foundation" is, therefore, the cause, 
the seed, the potentiality, or the original innate Suchness that exists in all beings at 
all times. The Path of Mahamudra is the practice that one follows within the 
framework of the basic Mahamudra Doctrine. The Accomplishment of Mahamudra is the full realization of the original, endowed Buddha-nature- the Foundation 
-within oneself. These three terms, in addition to their special and specific connotations, are used here, as well as in many other places throughout the book, in 
a very general sense to denote religious faith, practice, and achievement. 
8 A merit-possessor is a good vessel for Dharma, a well-destined person. According to Buddhism, a person becomes a good vessel for Dharma in this life partly 
because he has performed meritorious deeds in his past lives. 
9 Non-ego of existence (T.T.: Chos.Kyi.bDag.Med.): the truth of Non-being or 
Voidness. 
I 0 The Precepts of Five Virtues: These are the basic precepts for all Buddhists, including monks and laymen. They are: One should not (I) kill, (2) steal, 
(3) commit adultery, (4) lie, or (5) take intoxicants. 
11 Innate-hom Wisdom: From the Tantric viewpoint, the realization of this 
inborn and ubiquitous Wisdom is the realization of Buddhahood itself, and so is the 
core of Tantric teachings. 
12 At the time of death, the Clear Light of the Dharmakaya will shine for a 
short while, but because of ignorance and habitual clinging men cannot recognize it, 
thus they miss the chance of Liberation. See "The Tibetan Book of the Dead," edited by W. Y. Evans-Wentz, Oxford University Press, 1957. 
13 Milarepa gave this very important warning to yogis, pointing out that there 
are many different kinds and degrees of illumination. Some are mundane, some 
are transcendental, some are psychic phenomena, and some are the real illuminations of Transcendental Wisdom. 
14 Mother-and-Son Light: See Story 9, Note 17. 
15 Buddhism claims that faith and meditation alone cannot liberate one 
frolll Satpsara. Without the complete destruction of ego-clinging, or the absolute 
annihilation of the habitual-thinking seeds in the Store Consciousness (Alayavijfiana), a real Liberation is impossible. Various teachings are given by different 
Buddhist Schools to attain this Liberation, such as the Prajfiaparamita of Madhyamika; the Contemplation-on-Away-from-Subjective-Objective-Ideas of Yogacara; the 
Sameness of Satpsiira and Nirva~a of general Tantrism; and the Unification of the 
Mother-and-Son Light of Mahamudra. 
16 Faith, good will, compassion, and Samadhi cannot bring one to Enlightenment without the Prajfia insight. Deep contemplation on Siinyata, or Voidness, is 
therefore absolutely necessary. 

--- PAGE 151 ---
THE SONG OF 
REALIZATION 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
T
HE Jetsun Milarepa returned to Nya Non from the Happy Town of 
Mang Yul. His former patrons were all delighted [to see him again] 
and begged him to stay in Nya Non permanently. At the foot of a 
huge tree stood a belly-shaped rock, beneath which there was a cave, 
and Milarepa took up his abode there. Then the Venerable Shaja 
Guna and a number of patrons of Nya Non came and asked him what 
progress and Realization he had attained during his sojourn in other 
places. In answer he sang: 
I make obeisance to Marpa, the Translator. 
During my stay elsewhere 
I realized that nothing is; 
I freed myself from the duality of 
past and future; 
I apprehended that the Six Realms do not exist. 
I was delivered once and for all from 
life and death, 
And understood that all things are equal. 
I shall cling no more to happiness or sorrow. 
I realized as illusion all that I perceive, 
And was freed from taking and from leaving. 
I realized the truth of Non-difference, 
And was freed from both Sa111sara and Nirvaf,la. 
I also realized as illusions the Practice, 
Steps, and Stages. 
My mind is thus devoid of hope and fear. 
--- PAGE 152 ---
The patrons again asked Milarepa, "What else did you understand?" 
Milarepa replied, "Well, to please you, I will sing an appropriate, 
helpful song": 
One's parents provide the outer cause 
and conditions; 
One's Universal Seed Consciousness1 
is within; 
The acquired pure human body is between these two. 
With these three endowments one stands apart 
From the Three Miserable Realms. 
By observing the wearisome process of 
birth in the outer world, 
The longing for renunciation and the 
faith for Dharma will grow from within. 
In addition, one should e'er remember the 
teaching of Buddha; 
Thus will one be freed from worldly kinsmen 
and enemies. 
The Father-Guru provides help from without; 
Self-discrimination arises from the effort within; 
Between these two grows confidence and conviction. 
Thus is one freed from all doubt and confusion. 
One thinks of sentient beings in the Six 
Realms without, 
While unbounded love shines from the mind within. 
Between the two come the experiences of 
meditation. 
Thus one is freed from all partial compassion.2 
Outwardly, the Three Kingdoms are self-liberated; 
Inwardly, self-present Wisdom3 brightly shines; 
Between the two, faith in Realization stands firm. 
Thus fade anxiety and fear. 
The Five Desires manifest without; 
Non-clinging Wisdom shines within; 
A feeling of [the two) tasting as one4 
Is experienced in between. 
Thus one is freed from the distinction of 
weal and woe. 
The absence of act and deed appears without, 
The departure of fear and hope is seen within; 

--- PAGE 153 ---
The Song of Realization 
Between the two, and from you apart, 
Is the sickness that comes from effort. 
Thus one is freed from choosing 
between good and evil. 
The Venerable Shaja Guna said to Milarepa, "My dear Jetsun, 
your mind has long been absorbed in Purity, yet though I was with 
you before, I never received a definitive and convincing teaching from 
you. Now, please give me the Initiations and instructions." The Jetsun complied with his request, and made him start practicing. 
After some time, Shaja Guna had an experience, and came to Milarepa, saying, "If Saq~sara and manifestations do not exist, there is 
no need to practice Dharma; if the mind is non-existent, there is no 
need for the Guru; but if there is no Guru, how can one learn the 
practice? Please explain the nature of these things and enlighten me 
upon the Essence of Mind." 
Milarepa then sang: 
Manifestation is not [something) coming 
into being; 
If one sees something happen, it is merely clinging. 
The nature of Saq~sara is the absence of substance; 
If one sees substance therein, it is merely 
an illusion. 
The nature of mind is two-in-one; 
If one discriminates or sees opposites, 
It is one's attachment and affection. 
The qualified Guru is the Lineage-possessor; 
It is then folly to create one's own Guru. 
The Essence of Mind is like the sky; 
Sometimes it is shadowed by the clouds 
of Thought-flow. 
Then the wind of the Guru's inner teaching 
Blows away the drifting clouds; 
Yet the Thought-flow itself is the illumination. 
The Experience is as natural as sun- and moon-light; 
Yet it is beyond both space and time. 
It is beyond all words and description. 
But assurance grows in one's heart, like 
many stars a'shining; 
Whenever it so shines, great ecstasy arises. 

--- PAGE 154 ---
TilE HUNDRED TIIOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
Beyond all playwords lies the nature of 
the Dharmakaya; 
Of the action of the Six Groups, it is 
utterly devoid. 
It is transcendant, effortless, and natural, 
Beyond the grasp of self and non-self. 
Dwelling forever in it is the Wisdom of 
Non-clinging. 
Wondrous is the Trikaya, Three in One. 
He then told Shaja Guna not to become attached to pleasure, fame, 
and the world, but to devote himself to the practice of the Dharma 
all his life and urge others to do likewise. 
Then Milarepa sang: 
Hear me, you well-gifted man! 
Is not this life uncertain and delusive? 
Are not its pleasures and enjoyments like a mirage? 
Is there any peace here in Saq~sara? 
Is not its false felicity as unreal as a dream? 
Are not both praise and blame empty as an echo? 
Are not all forms the same as the Mind-nature? 
Are not Self-mind and the Buddha identical? 
Is not the Buddha the same as the Dharmakaya? 
Is not the Dharmakaya identical with Truth? 
The enlightened one knows that all things are mental; 
Therefore one should observe one's mind by 
day and night. 
If you watch it, you can still see nothing. 
Fix then your mind in this non-seeing state. 
There is no self-entity in Milarepa's mind; 
I, myself, am the Mahamudra; 
Because there is no difference between Static 
and Active Meditation, 
I have no need for the different stages in the Path. 
Whatever they may manifest, their essence 
is Voidness; 
There is neither mindfulness nor nonmindfulness in my contemplation. 
I have tasted the flavor of Non-existence; 

--- PAGE 155 ---
The Song of Realization 
Compared to other teachings, this is the highest. 
The Yoga-practice of the Na<;lis, PraiJa, and Bindu,5 
The teaching of Karma Mudra6 and of Mantra Yoga, 
The practice of visualizing Buddha and the 
Four Pure Positions, 
These are only the first steps in Mahayana. 
To practice them uproots not lust and hate. 
Bear what I now sing firmly in your minds; 
All things are of the Self-mind, which is void. 
He who ne'er departs from the Experience and 
Realization [of the Void), 
Without effort has accomplished all practices 
of worship and discipline. 
In this are found all merits and marvels! 
Thus Milarepa sang, and the teacher, Shaja Guna, devoted himself 
to practicing meditation. He attained an extraordinary understanding 
and became one of the intimate Son-Disciples of the Jetsun. 
This is the story of Milarepa's ripening the priest, Shaja Guna of 
Nya Non, in the Belly Cave. 
NOTES 
1 Universal Seed Consciousness:· Store Consciousness (Aiaya-vijnana). See Story 
4, Note 38. 
2 Partial compassion: An enlightened being should have an unlimited and indiscriminative compassion in contrast to the limitative and favoring love of ordinary men. This ever-present infinite compassion is brought about by the Mahamudra Practice. It is said an infinite compassion will flow naturally from the InbornBuddha-Mind when one reaches the advanced stage of Mahamudra. 
3 Self-present \Visdom: An enlightened being never feels that he attains the 
Wisdom of Buddha, he merely discovers it- the ever-present Wisdom. 
4 Tasting as one, or One-taste (T.T.: Ro.gCig.): vVhen one is freed from discriminitive thoughts, he then reaches the realm of "One-taste," whence he sees the 
non-differentiation of beings and becomes one with the "Universal Harmony" 
and the "Interpenetrating Totality." (See the "Avatarhsaka Sutra"; and D. T. 
Suzuki's "The Essence of Buddhism," The Buddhist Society, London, 1957.) 
5 Nac;lis, Pra~a. and Bindu: See Story 7, Note 19. 
6 Karma Mudra: an advanced Perfecting Yoga through which the sexual energy 
is sublimated. 

--- PAGE 156 ---
A WOMAN'S ROLE IN 
THE DHARMA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O NCE Jetsun Milarepa intended to go to North Horse Gate snow 
mountain to practice meditation. [On the way], he came to Gebha 
Lesum in the district of Jung. It was autumn, and the villagers were 
busy harvesting. In a large field a very beautiful girl, about fifteen 
years of age, was leading a group of laborers. She seemed to have all 
the qualifications of an Angel of Wisdom (Oakini). Milarepa approached her and said, "Dear Patroness, please give me alms." "Dear 
Yogi, please go to my house," the girl replied, "It is over there. Wait 
for me at the door. I will come directly." 
Accordingly, Milarepa went to her home, pushed the door open 
with his staff, and entered. Immediately, an ugly old woman with a 
handful of ashes rushed at him, shouting, "You miserable yogi-beggars! I never see you in one place! In the summer you all show up 
begging for milk and butter! In the winter you all come for grain! 
I'll wager you wanted to sneak in to steal my daughter's and daughter-in-law's jewelry!" Grumbling and trembling with rage, she was 
about to throw the ashes at Milarepa, when he said, "Wait a minute, 
Grandmother! Please listen to mel" He then sang a song with nine 
meanings: 
Above is the auspicious Heaven, 
Below are the Three Paths of misery, 
In between, are those who are not free to 
choose their birth.1 
These three all converge on you. 
Grandmother, you are an angry woman, 
And dislike the Dharma! 
--- PAGE 157 ---
A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
Question your own thoughts and your mind examine. 
You should practice the Buddha's teaching, 
You need a qualified and dependable Guru. 
Think carefully, dear lady; 
When you were first sent here, 
Did you dream you would become an old nanny-goat? 
In the morning you get up from bed, 
In the evening you go to sleep, 
In between, you do the endless housework; 
You are engrossed in these three things. 
Grandmother, you are the unpaid maid. 
Question your own thought and your mind examine. 
You should practice Buddha's teaching, 
You need a qualified and dependable Guru, 
And then things may be different for you. 
The head of the family is the most important one, 
Income and earnings are the next most longed-for 
things, 
Then sons and nephews are wan ted most. 
By these three you are bound. 
Grandmother, for yourself you have no share. 
Question your own thought and your mind examine. 
You should practice Buddha's teaching, 
You need a qualified and dependable Guru, 
And then things may be different for you. 
Attaining what you want even though you steal, 
Getting what you desire even though you rob, 
Fighting your foe without regard for death 
and wounds, 
To these three things you are subjected. 
Grandmother, you are burned up with fury 
When you come upon your foe. 
Question your own thought and your mind examine. 
You should practice Buddha's teaching, 
You need a qualified and dependable Guru, 
And then things may be different for you. 
Gossip about other women and their manners 
Is what interests you; 
To the affairs of your own son and nephew 
--- PAGE 158 ---
You pay attention; 
To talk of widows and relatives is your delight. 
These three things enchant you. 
Grandmother, are you so gentle when you gossip? 
Question your own thought and your mind examine. 
You should practice Buddha's teaching, 
You need a qualified and dependable Guru, 
And then things may be different for you. 
To lift you from a chair is like pulling out a peg; 
With feeble legs 
You waddle like a thieving goose; 
Earth and stone seem to shatter 
When you drop into a seat; 
Senile and clumsy is your body. · 
Grandmother, you have no choice but to obey. 
Question your own thought and your mind examine. 
You should practice the Buddha's teaching, 
What you require is a qualified and dependable Guru, 
And from that you may find out how you have changed. 
Your skin is creased with wrinkles; 
Your bones stand out sharply from your shrunken flesh; 
You are deaf, dumb, imbecile, eccentric, and 
tottering; 
You are thrice deformed. 
Grandmother, your ugly face is wrapped in wrinkles. 
Question your own thought and your mind examine. 
You should practice Buddha's teaching, 
You need a qualified and dependable Guru, 
And then things may be different for you. 
Your food and drink are cold and foul, 
Your coat is heavy and in rags, 
Your bed so rough it tears the skin;2 
These three are your constant companions. 
Grandmother, you are now a wretch, 
half woman and half bitch! 
Question your own thought and your mind examine! 
You should practice Buddha's teaching, 
What you need is a qualified and dependable Guru, 
And then things may be different for you. 

--- PAGE 159 ---
A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
To attain a higher birth and Liberation 
Is harder than to see a star in daytime; 
To fall into Saq1sara's wretched path 
Is easy and happens often. 
Now, with fear and grief at heart, 
You watch the time of death draw nigh. 
Grandmother, can you face death with confidence? 
Question your own thought and your mind examine! 
What you need is to practice the teaching of Buddha, 
What you need is a qualified and dependable Guru. 
Upon hearing this profound, yet melodious song, the old woman 
was so moved that she could not but develop a deep faith in the 
Jetsun. Unconsciously her fists loosened, and the ashes slipped through 
her fingers to the floor. She regretted what she had done to the 
Jetsun, and to:.ched by his compassion and words, she could not 
help shedding tears. 
Meantime the girl in the field [whose name was Bardarbom] was just 
entering the house. Seeing the old woman in tears she turned to 
Milarepa and cried, "What is the matter? Did you, a follower of 
Buddha, strike a poor old woman?" The grandmother quickly intervened, "No, no, please do not wrongly accuse him! He never said 
anything unkind to me. It was I who treated him wrongly. He gave 
me such a proper and much-needed lesson that it moved me very 
deeply. It also awakened me to my neglect of religion. I was touched 
with such great remorse that it compelled me to shed tears. Oh, you 
are young and different from me; you have faith as well as wealth, 
and it is very fortunate for you to meet such a teacher as Milarepa. 
You should give him offerings and service, and ask him to bestow 
upon you the teachings and instructions." 
The girl replied, "Both of you are very wonderful! Are you the 
great Yogi, Milarepa? By merely meeting you I shall have accumulated a great deal of merit. If you would kindly tell us your Lineage, 
it will inspire us and also your other disciples. It will certainly change 
our hearts. So, please do relate it for me." 
Milarepa thought, "This is a well-gifted woman; she will become 
a good disciple of mine." And so he sang: 
The omnipresent Dharmakaya is Buddha 
Sa manta bhadra; 
The majestic Sambhogakaya is Buddha 
the Thunderbolt-Holder; 

--- PAGE 160 ---
The Savior of sentient beings, the 
Nirmiii;~akaya, is Gautama Buddha. 
One may find [the teachings) of all 
three Buddhas in my Lineage. 
Such is the Lineage of this yogi; will you 
entrust yourself to it? 
"Your Lineage is indeed superb," said Bardarbom, "it is what the 
snow mountain is to rivers-the original source of all [merits). I have 
heard people say that you, the followers of Dharma, have a so-called 
'Outer Pointing Guru'; and that by relying on him, one will be able 
to observe and see inwardly the so-called Uncreated Dharmakaya. 
What kind of Guru do you have? Who is your primary Guru?" 
Milarepa replied, "I will sing a short song to explain the qualifications of a genuine Guru." 
The Guru who indicates the true knowledge 
from without, 
Is your Outer Guru; 
The Guru who elucidates the Awareness of 
Mind within, 
Is your Inner Guru; 
The Guru who illuminates the nature of your mind, 
Is your real Guru. 
I am a yogi who has all three Gurus, 
Is there a disciple here who wishes to 
be faithful to them?" 
"These Gurus are extraordinary!" exclaimed the girl, "It is just like 
a string of gems on a golden chain. But before we beseech the 
teachings from them, what kind of Initiations are required?" Milarepa 
then sang: 
The Vase placed on your head 
Is the Outer Initiation; 
The proof of the identity of self-body 
and the Body of Buddha 
Is the Inner Initiation; 
The Illumination of the self-recognition 
of Mind-Essence 
Is the real Initiation. 
I am a yogi who has attained all three. 
Is there a disciple here who wishes to attain them? 

--- PAGE 161 ---
A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
Bardarbom cried out, "These Initiations are indeed profound! It is 
just like the majesty of the lion, which overawes all other animals. I 
have also heard that after the Initiation there is an absolute teaching 
called 'Leading Awareness into the Path.' What is that? Please be kind 
enough to explain it to me." 
In answer to her question, Milarepa sang: 
The Outer Teaching is hearing, thinking, 
and practicing; 
The Inner Teaching is the clearest 
elucidation of Awareness; 
The Absolute Teaching is the non-gathering 
or separation of Experience and Realization.3 
I am a yogi who has all three Teachings. 
Is there a disciple here who wishes to attain them? 
Bardarbom declared, "These teachings are indeed like a rustless 
mirror, which reflects images flawlessly." Milarepa replied, "Having attained these teachings, one should go to a hermitage and practice." 
The girl then asked, "Will you tell me about these practices?" Milarepa 
sang in answer: 
Living in a rugged, deserted, and solitary hut 
Is the Outer Practice; 
Complete disregard of the self-body 
Is the Inner Practice; 
Knowing the sole Absolute, through and through, 
Is the Absolute Practice. 
I am a yogi who knows all three. 
Is there a disciple here who wishes to learn them? 
After hearing this, the girl said, "The Practice you have mentioned 
is like a great eagle flying in the sky. Its splendor overshadows all 
other birds1" She continued, "I have heard people say that some yogis 
know a teaching called 'Pai Practice,'4 which is very helpful in improving meditation. Could you tell me about it?" Milarepa then sang: 
'By applying the Outer "Pai Teaching" to 
the distracted thought-flow, 
The mind is collected; 
By applying the Inner "Pai Teaching" to awareness, 
The mind is awakened from drowsiness. 
To rest [the mind] on the innate nature, 

--- PAGE 162 ---
Is the Absolute "Pai Teaching." 
I am the Yogi who knows all three. 
Is there a disciple here who wishes to know them? 
"This Pai Teaching of yours is indeed wonderful!" exclaimed Bardarbom, "It is just like the order or summons of the Emperor; it quickens and intensifies one's accomplishments. But if one practices it, what 
experiences will one have?" Milarepa sang in reply: 
One will experience the great and 
omnipresent Non-effort Root; 
One will experience the Non-effort 
Path, the great transparency; 
One will experience the Non-effort 
Fruit,5 great Mahamudra. 
I am a yogi who has experienced them all. 
Is there a disciple here who wishes to do likewise? 
Bardarbom then said, "These three experiences are like the bright 
sun shining from a cloudless sky, outlining everything on the earth 
clearly and distinctly. They are indeed wonderful! But what assurance 
have you gained through them?" Milarepa sang again: 
No Heaven and no Hell, is the assurance 
of Knowledge,8 
No meditation and no distraction is the 
assurance of Practice, 
No hope and no fear is the assurance of Accomplishment. 
I am a yogi with these three assurances. 
Is there a disciple here who wishes to attain them? 
Thereupon, the girl became very faithful to the Jetsun. She bowed 
down at his feet, and with great veneration she invited him to the 
inner [chamber], and gave him perfect service and offerings. Then 
she said "Dear Guru, so far, I have been hindered by ignorance, and 
so have not been able to think of the real Teachings. Now, through 
your great compassion, please take me as your servant and disciple." 
Thus the girl fully realized her past faults of self-conceit. She then 
sang: 
Oh! You peerless Teacher! 
You most perfect of men, the incarnation of Buddha! 
How stupid, blind, and ignorant am I. 

--- PAGE 163 ---
A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
How wrong and sinful is this world! 
The heat of summer was so great that it 
scattered the cool clouds, 
And I found no shelter in the shade. 
The cold of winter was so severe 
That though flowers still grew, I 
never found them. 
The influence of my evil habitual-thinking 
was so strong 
That I never saw you as an accomplished being. 
Let me tell you my story: 
Because of my sinful Karma I was given 
this inferior [female] body. 
Through the evil-hindrance of this world, 
I never realized the identity of self and Buddha. 
Lacking the necessary diligence, 
I seldom thought of Buddha's teaching. 
Though I desired the Dharma, 
Lazy and inert, I frittered time away. 
To a woman, a prosperous birth means 
bondage and non-freedom. 
To a woman, a wretched birth means the 
loss of companionship. 
To our husbands we sometimes talk of suicide; 
We set aside and leave our gracious parents; 
Great is our ambition, but our perseverance small. 
We are experts in slander, ingenious to blame, 
The source of news and gossip. 
We are those who must be kept away from the betrothed, 
For though to all we give food aud money, 
We are ever slandered as stingy and i11-tempered. 
Seldom do we think of impermanence and death. 
The sinful hindrances always follow us like shadows. 
Now, with deep sincerity, I look forward to 
the Dharma. 
Pray, give me a teaching easy to practice 
and understand! 
This pleased Milarepa very much and he sang in reply: 
Happy and fortunate girl, 
--- PAGE 164 ---
Should I praise your story or disparage it? 
If I praise it, you will be proud; 
If I disparage it, you will be angry; 
If I tell the truth, it will expose your 
hidden faults. 
Now, listen to the song of an old man: 
If you sincerely wish to practice Dharma, 
Wash the dirt from off your face, 
And sweep away the filth from your heart. 
Sincerity and earnestness are good, 
But humility and modesty are better. 
Even though you may give away your son and husband, 
It is better to rely on a qualified Guru. 
Though you may abandon worldly life, 
To strive for future EnlightenmenF is better. 
Though one may renounce parsimony and avarice, 
It is better still to give without sparing. 
It is wise to know these things. 
With high spirits, 
You play and sport as shrewdly as a rat. 
You may be very eloquent, 
But have no Dharma in your heart. 
Like a wild peahen you playOf coquetry you know too much, 
But too little of devotion. 
My dear, you are full of cunning and deceit 
Like a merchant in the market-place. 
It is hard for you to practice Dharma. 
If you want to practice Buddha's teaching rightly, 
You should follow me and my Path, 
Meditating without distraction in a remote 
mountain. 
Bardarbom then sang: 
You are the Jetsun, the precious Yogi! 
One surely will gain benefits by associating with you. 
In the daytime I am busy working; 
Drowsy, I go to bed at night. 

--- PAGE 165 ---
A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
A slave of household work am I. 
Where can I find the time to practice Dharma? 
Milarepa replied, "If you seriously want to practice the Dharma, 
you must learn that worldly affairs are your enemies and renounce 
them." And he sang a song called "The Four Renunciations": 
Listen, you fortunate girl, 
You who have wealth and faith! 
Future lives last longer than this lifeDo you know how to make provision? 
Giving with a niggardly heart 
As if feeding a strange watchdog, 
Only brings more harm than goodBringing nothing in return but a vicious bite. 
Renounce parsimony, now that you know its evil. 
Listen, you fortunate girl! 
We know less of this life than the next one. 
Have you prepared and lit your lamp? 
Should it not be ready, 
Meditate on the "Great Light." 
If you choose to help an ungrateful foe, 
You will gain not a friend, but damage. 
Beware of acting blindly; 
Beware of this evil and discard it. 
Listen, you fortunate girl. 
Future lives are worse than this lifeHave you a guide or escort for your journey? 
If you have not the right companion, 
Rely on the holy Dharma. 
Beware of relatives and kinsmen; 
They hinder and oppose [the Dharma]. 
They never help, but only harm one. 
Did you know that your kinsmen are your foes? 
If this be true, surely you should leave them. 
Listen, you fortunate girl. 
The journey in the future life is more 
hazardous than this one-

--- PAGE 166 ---
Have you prepared a fine horse of 
perseverance for it? 
If not, you should strive hard and work 
with diligence. 
The excitement of the start will soon diminish; 
Beware the foe, "Inertness," which makes 
one go astray. 
Of no avail are hurry and excitement, which 
only harm one. 
Do you yet know that your enemies are 
laziness and caprice? 
If you understand my words, you should 
cast them both away. 
Bardarbom then said, "Dear Lama, I have not yet made any preparation for the next life, but will now begin to do so. Please be 
kind enough to teach me the Practice." Thus with great sincerity she 
besought him. Milarepa was delighted, and replied, "I am glad that 
you are really earnest in devoting yourself to religion. In the tradition 
of my Lineage, it is not necessary to change one's name or to cut off 
one's hair.8 One may reach Buddhahood either as a layman, or as a 
monk. Without changing one's status, one may still become a good 
Buddhist." Then he sang for her a song called "The Four Parables 
and Five Meanings," giving the instruction of Mind-Practice: 
Listen, you fortunate girl, 
You who have wealth and faith! 
Thinking of the magnitude of the sky, 
Meditate on the Vastness with no center 
and no edge. 
Thinking of the sun and moon, 
Meditate upon their light 
Without darkness or obscurity. 
Resembling the unchanging, solid mountain 
before you, 
You should meditate with steadiness and solidity. 
Like the ocean, infinitely great and unfathomably deep, 
Absorb yourself in deepest contemplation. 
Thus meditate on your Self-mind; 

--- PAGE 167 ---
A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
Thus, with no doubt and error, practice. 
Then Milarepa instructed her in the physical and mental practices, 
and sent her to meditate. Later on the girl, having had some experiences, and in order to dispel her doubts and break down her hindrances, came and sang to him: 
Oh You, the Jetsun, the precious Guru, 
You man of consummation, the Transformation 
Body of Buddha! 
It was fine, when I contemplated on the sky! 
But I felt uneasy when I thought of clouds. 
How should I meditate on them? 
It was good, when I contemplated on the sun and moon! 
But I felt uneasy when I thought of stars 
and planets. 
How should I meditate on them? 
It was fine, when I contemplated the solid mountain! 
But I felt uneasy when I thought of trees and bushes. 
How should I meditate on them? 
It was good, when I contemplated the great ocean! 
But I felt uneasy when I thought of waves. 
How should I meditate on them? 
It was fine, when I contemplated the nature 
of Self-mind, 
But I felt uneasy when I encountered everflowing thoughts!9 
How should I meditate on them? 
After hearing her song, Milarepa was greatly pleased. He knew that 
she really had had the Experiences in meditation. Thus, in order to 
dear her doubts and further her understanding, he sang: 
Listen, you fortunate girl, 
You who have wealth and faith! 
If you felt fine in meditating on the 
sky, so be it with the clouds. 

--- PAGE 168 ---
Clouds are but manifestations of the sky; 
Therefore, rest right in the sphere of the sky! 
The stars are but reflections of the sun and moon; 
If you can meditate on them, then why not 
on the stars? 
Therefore, absorb yourself in the light of 
the sun and moon! 
Bushes and trees are but manifestations of 
a mountain; 
If you can meditate well on that, so be it with the trees! 
Therefore, abide in the steadfastness of the mountain! 
Waves are but the movement of the ocean; 
If you can meditate well on that, why not 
on the waves? 
Therefore, dissolve yourself right in the ocean! 
The disturbing Thought-flow manifests the mind; 
If you can meditate well on that, so be it 
with the Thought-flow! 
Therefore, dissolve yourself into the very 
Essence of Mind! 
From then on, Bardarbom strove to contemplate on the real nature 
of the mind, and eventually she achieved perfect Realization in one 
life. At her death she flew to the Oakini's Pure Land in her human body. People all heard the sound of the small drum that she was 
carrying at the time. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting his woman disciple, Bardarbom, one of his four female heirs, at the place of Gebha Lesum of 
Jung. 
NOTES 
1 Driven by the force of Karma, Saf!lsliric beings are not able to _clloose their 
own birth when they reincarnate. 

--- PAGE 169 ---
A Woman's Role in the Dharma 
2 This is a free translation. 
3 Experience and Realization: See Story 7, Notes 9 and 12. 
4 "Pai Practice," or -the Teaching of Pai (T.T.: Phat): The Tibetan word 
"Phat,'' pronounced "Pai," is common in Tantric incantations. It is used as a 
means of cutting distracting thoughts and to arouse the consciousness from drowsi· 
ness occurring in meditation. In applying the Pai teaching, the yogi first concentrates on the thought-flow, drowsiness, apparitions, or whatever hindrances appear, 
and then suddenly shouts "Pai!" with all his strength. By doing this the hindrances 
are eventually eliminated. 
5 The Non-effort Root, Path, and Fruit: "Root" means the basic principle, 
the nature of Buddhahood. "Path" refers to the practice of this basic principle. "Fruit" is the resulting accomplishment or realization of the basic principle. 
(See Story 12, Notes 5, 6, and 7.) 
6 Knowldege, (T.T.: lTa.Wa.), or the "View" of the absolute non-existence 
of being 
7 Lit.: "to strive for the Great Affair." 
8 To cut off the hair: This refers to the shaving of a monk's head during the 
ceremony of ordination. 
9 Ever.flowing thoughts: Only through actual meditation practice can one 
experience the ungovernable and ever-running errant thoughts that constantly arise 
in one's own mind. 

--- PAGE 170 ---
THE SONG AT THE INN 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
H
AVING meditated at Jundhagho [North Horse Gate], the Jetsun 
Milarepa went to Shri Ri to meditate; on his way, he lodged in 
an inn at Yei Ru Jang. A scholar named Yaugru Tangbha, with 
many monk disciples, and a merchant called Dhawa Norbu [the 
Moon Jewel], with a great retinue, were also stopping there. Milarepa begged alms from the merchant, who said, "You yogis are accustomed to taking the belongings of others to enjoy yourselves; why 
don't you try to earn your own living? It would be much better to 
be self-supporting!" Milarepa replied, "It is true that by following 
your way one may have more immediate happiness and enjoyment, 
but this very enjoyment will cause more suffering in the future. This 
is the important point you have neglected. Now listen to my song, 
'The Eight Reminders'": 
Castles and crowded cities are the places 
Where now you love to stay; 
But remember that they will fall in ruins 
After you have departed from this earth. 
Pride and vainglory are the lure 
Which now you love to follow; 
But remember, when you are about to die 
They offer you no shelter and no refuge! 
Kinsmen and relatives are the people 
With whom now you love to live! 
But remember that you must leave them all behind 
When from this world you pass away! 
Servants, wealth, and children 
--- PAGE 171 ---
The Song at the Inn 
Are things that you love to hold; 
But remember, at the moment of your death 
Your empty hands can take nothing with you! 
Vigor and health are dearest to you now; 
But remember that at the moment of your death 
Your corpse will be bundled up1 and borne away! 
Now your organs are clear, your blood and 
flesh are strong and vigorous; 
But remember, at the moment of your death 
They will no longer be at your disposal! 
Sweet and delicious foods are things 
That now you love to eat; 
But remember, at the moment of your death 
Your mouth will let the spittle flow! 
When of all this I think, I cannot help 
But seek the Buddha's teachings! 
The enjoyments and pleasures of this world, 
For me have no attraction. 
I, Milarepa, sing of the Eight Reminders, 
At the Guest House of Garakhache of Tsang. 
With these clear words I give this helpful warning; 
I urge you to observe and practice them! 
Thus he sang, and his song roused in the merchant, Dhawa Norbu, 
such a deep faith that he exclaimed, "Dear Lama, what you have 
sung is indeed very true and clear and has made me think of the 
Dharma. Pray, instruct me how to practice the teaching of Buddha." 
In answer, Milarepa sang: 
The rugged hermitage is the place of virtue, 
The Guru with knowledge and practice is the 
precious jewel 
To whom one should pray with sincerity and reverence. 
Without errors the teachings should be practiced. 
He who feels his mind run wild, 
Should apply his View2 [of Voidness] for the cure. 
The attachments of his mind are thus freed. 

--- PAGE 172 ---
How wonderful this is! 
He whose mind feels sick, 
Should beg the alms of Non-discrimination.3 
He will then experience the self-liberation 
of the places to which [he travels]. 
How wonderful this is! 
He who dislikes his meditation experiences, 
Should compare and discuss them with 
proficient Gurus. 
To talk and live with these experienced yogis, 
Surely will help his mind! 
If sometimes doubts arise, and skepticism, 
One should read the holy sayings of the Buddha. 
With conviction in the true words of the Dharma, 
Confidence and faith in one's heart will grow! 
He who feels uneasy and unwell, 
Should pray to his Father Guru 
With all earnestness; 
Thus will he be blessed and his mind made tranquil. 
Again, one should think of those faithless men 
Who lay their bodies down on Sa111sara's bed, 
\Vho lay their heads upon the pillows of the Five Poisons 
And fling the dung of their passions to the Ten 
Directions. 
One should search for (the physician who 
can) cure them. 
With the devotion of the Three Gates4 
one should make the diagnosis; 
Through the Six Merits of the Guru-Doctor 
one should give the medicine. 
Thus one is assured that the Three Bodies 
will be attained, 
And the Five Poisonous Passions cured! 
In order to beg pardon and forgiveness 
One should give offerings sincerely. 
Upon hearing this song the merchant was confirmed with the deep-

--- PAGE 173 ---
The Song at the Inn 
est faith toward the Jetsun. From that time on, as a layman, he 
followed the Jetsun's instruction in Dharma practice and became a· 
very good yogi. 
At the same time in the inn, while Milarepa was appearing as an 
ascetic, the scholar·doctor, Yaugru Tangbha was preaching the Dharma. His monk-disciples busily recited prayers in the evening, and sat 
in a crouching posture practicing Samadhi in the daytime. They even 
held religious ceremonies and started their sermons before daybreak. 
One day, Milarepa went to the congregation during the midday 
meal to beg a little food. 5 Several monks said, "What a pitiful sight 
this man is! He acts and dresses like a yogi, but does not practice 
or learn any teaching of the Dharma; without any knowledge or desire for meditation, he fails even to recite a single prayer; and he 
even asks alms from the priests! What a pity! What a pity!" And they 
all felt great pity and sorrow for him. Milarepa then said to them, 
"My mind is always at ease and happy, because I can practice simultaneously the various devotions, such as reciting Mantras and visualizing Devas' bodies, while learning and carrying out the teachings of 
the Buddha. Please listen to my song": 
The Three Precious Ones, supporting all 
In the realm of Non-doing AwarenessI realize them all! 
Why then should I pray to them? 
Happy is the practice of Yoga 
Without Mantra and muttering! 
The bestower of the two Siddhis6 is 
the protecting Buddha. 
In the realm of Great Illumination, 
I have completely realized the Buddha 
of Non-existence, 
And so I need not practice the Arising Yoga! 
Happy is the experience 
Of identifying the Self-body with the Buddha! 
The Oakinis sweep all obstacles away and 
destroy misfortunes; 
In the realm of Self-essence, the plane of origin, 
I have completely realized them. 
And so I have no need to make the ritual offering! 
Happy is the Yoga 

--- PAGE 174 ---
In which the six sense-organs relax at ease! 
Apprehensions are the source of hindranceS. 
In the realm of Dharma-Essence, 
I identify demon-seeing with the Perfection; 
Therefore, I need do no exorcising. 
Happy is the Yoga 
In which I identify the Dharmakaya with apprehensions! 
The words and writing, the dogmas 
And the logic I absorb 
In the Realm of Illuminating Consciousness. 
For me, there is no need of learning. 
Happy is the experience of Yoga, 
The source of all the Sfitras. 
Whereupon the Doctor, Yaugru, said to Milarepa, "Dear Yogi, 
your experience and understanding are indeed marvelous. However, 
according to the principles of Buddhism, an object or teaching must 
be given from which beginners may learn; also it is desirable and 
helpful to encourage people to follow the Yellow-robed [monks] in 
the practice of virtuous deeds. Is that not so?" Milarepa replied, "This 
may be the teaching of your School, and you may do what you like. 
But my teaching is a little different. In it, if one feels he has nothing 
to be ashamed of, that will be sufficient! From what I can see, your 
way of devotion is like this-judge for yourself and see whether what 
I am going to say is true": 
I take refuge in the Three Precious Ones; 
May my compassionate Guru ever protect and bless me. 
You scholar-doctor of the Eight Worldly Engagements, 
How can you clear away ignorance and distraction 
for others, 
When you cannot conquer your own mind? 
Under the white canopy, stands a lovely peacock; 
But he vanishes as quickly as the lightning! 
Think, my dear Doctor! Is that not true? 
The kitchen of the monastery behind the village 
Is a symbol of misery and cheating; 
Think, my dear Doctor! Is that not so? 

--- PAGE 175 ---
The Song at the Inn 
Attending a boisterous public meeting 
Is like being driven round in a circle of fierce foes! 
Think, my dear Doctor! Is that not true? 
Accumulating horses, sheep, and jewels 
Is like dew upon the grass 
Under the warm breath of the wind. 
Think, my dear Doctor! Are they not alike? 
The illusory human body with its mass of passions 
Is like a corpse that has been gilded! 
Think, my dear Doctor! Are they not alike? 
Leading women practicers, without inner experience, 
Is a travesty of dignity, and a disgrace. 
Think, my dear Doctor! Is that not so? 
The food and offerings in the sacrificial circle 
Are like the tax collections of an arrogant inspector. 
Think, my dear Doctor! Are they not alike? 
Divination, Astrology, and Bon7 ritualsThese three Dharmas-of-the-town are like 
swindler's tricks. 
Think, my dear Doctor! Are they not alike? 
The tuneful hymns which enchant disciples 
Are like the malicious invocation of the Dragon Demon. 
Think, my dear Doctor! Are they not alike? 
Country, home, and fields are not true possessions 
But delusive, and tantalizing like rainbows 
to the young! 
Think, my dear Doctor! Is that not so? 
To sway and dominate disciples by fraud and hypocrisy 
Is like a lackey serving many masters. 
Think, my dear Doctor! Is that not true? 
To preach without the Essence 
Is a lie and fraud! 
Think, my dear Doctor! Is that not so? 
--- PAGE 176 ---
If you cannot help yourself 
How can you help others? 
After hearing this song, Doctor Yaugru took a very reverent attitude toward the Jetsun. Rising from his seat he bowed, with his eyes 
full of tears, and said, "What you say is very true. Please teach me 
the Dharma and allow me to become your disciple." 
Among the disciples of Doctor Yaugru there was a young monk 
called Sevan Dunchon Shawa who followed the Jetsun and obtained 
from him the Initiations and instructions. Having devoted himself 
to meditation, he attained the highest accomplishment. He was one 
of the heart-sons of the Jetsun, known as Sevan Repa from Dodra. 
This is the story of how Milarepa met his disciple Sevan Repa at 
the Garakhache Guest House of Yei Ru Jang in Tsang. 
NOTES 
1 In Tibet the corpse is usually loaded on a horse, like a folded bundle, and 
so carried away to the cemetery by the relatives. 
2 View: the basic understanding of the Voidness. If distracting thoughts run 
wildly during meditation, the yogi should identify them with the Void. They can 
thus be tranquilized and transformed. 
3 Non-discrimination: Whether his patrons are rich or poor, high or low, the 
yogi should beg alms without discrimination. At the same time he should remember 
that the giver, the receiver, and the alms are all non-existent, or illusory. 
4 Three Gates: body, mouth, and mind. 
5 The food remaining from the sacrament. 
6 The two Siddhis are the mundane and transcendental "accomplishments," 
or powers. 
7 Bon: the pre-Buddhist, native religion of Tibet. 

--- PAGE 177 ---
THE BANDIT--DISCIPLE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O
NE day when the Jetsun Milarepa was meditating in Shri Ri of 
Deut Jal, several bandits came to his hermitage. When they could 
not find any food or clothes, and learned how he lived and made his 
devotions, they could not help but have deep faith in him. They 
said, "Dear Lama, this place is very bad. Because of the unfavorable 
conditions, it must be very hard to get food. Please come to our country, and we will supply you properly." 
Milarepa replied, "It is true that conditions here may not be favorable, but I have everything I need to further my devotion. Though 
your place may be better, I do not want to go there. Instead, I 
would like you, on my behalf, to send to your country for well-endowed devotees to come here for meditation." And he sang a song 
called "Welcome to Meditate in Shri Ri": 
Shri Ri, that wondrous place in Jal, 
Is far to circle, but near to approach. 
Come here, you faithful and destined devotees 
And all who would renounce this world and life. 
Here is the wonderland, Shri Ri, 
Far indeed from towns, 
But close to meditation and accomplishment! 
Come to Shri Ri, you faithful and destined devotees 
And all who would renounce this world and life! 
Though the water here is scarce, the 
goddesses are many. 
Come to Shri Ri, you faithful and wellgifted devotees! 
--- PAGE 178 ---
Come to Shri Ri of J al, you disavowers of 
this world and life. 
Here is the wonderland, Shri Ri of Jal. 
It is a place of blessing, the palace of Dem Chog, 
He who bestows accomplishments and Siddhis! 
Come to Shri Ri, you faithful and well-gifted 
devotees, 
All you who disavow this world and life! 
This is the land of wonder, Shri Ri of Jal, 
Where the marvelous Guardian-brothers dwell, 
They who destroy your obstacles and difficulties! 
Come to Shri Ri, you faithful and destined devotees, 
And you who disavow this world and life. 
Having heard this song, the leader of the bandits was deeply moved 
with faith. He bowed down at Milarepa's feet and told him that he 
would come back to see him soon. Some time later, when he returned, he brought with him a large turquoise, but could not decide 
whether to offer it to Milarepa. Having a small present with him as 
well, he gave this to the Jetsun first. 
Milarepa smiled and said, "Do not hesitate! You may offer me 
that turquoise, although I have little use for jewels. I will accept it to 
perfect your merits." The bandit leader realized that Milarepa possessed the perfect miraculous power of knowing others' thoughts. He 
then offered him the turquoise. After accepting it, Milarepa said, "I 
now give you back this jewel, hoping that you will use it to sustain 
your devotion." 
The leader thought: "How wonderful! He has not the slightest desire for money!" And his faith in the Jetsun was confirmed. Milarepa 
then gave him the Initiations and instructions. After practicing them, 
he eventually attained superlative Experiences and Realization. Later 
on, he was known as Drigom Linkawa, and became one of the heartsons of Milarepa. 
This is the story of how Milarepa met Drigom Repa in Shri Ri of Jal. 

--- PAGE 179 ---
THE MEETING 
AT SILVER SPRING 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O
NE summer, the great Yogi, Jetsun Milarepa, was meditating at 
North Shri Ri. When autumn came and the harvest was ready, he 
went out for alms, but fell asleep in Upper Gog Tang. He dreamed 
that he saw a green girl with golden hair and .shining eyebrows, leading a youth about twenty years old. She said, "Milarepa, you will 
have eight petals from [the lotus of] your heart. This is one of them. 
Please bless him and bring him up!" She then disappeared. 
Upon awakening from his sleep, Milarepa thought over the meaning of his dream. He decided that the girl must have been a Oakini 
and that the "eight petals" must imply that he 'fOuld have eight superlative, destined, heart-like disciples. "Today, I shall probably meet 
a Karma-exhausted disciple, and I will try my best to help him." 
With this in mind, he climbed the road leading to Bong. When he 
reached a brook which flowed like silver, he paused for another nap. 
After a while, a young man riding on a black horse approached and 
asked, "Why, dear Yogi, do you sleep here?'' Milarepa parried the 
question by another one: "My dear patron, where are you going?" 
"I am going to cross this brook to Din Ri." 
Milarepa then explained, "Because of my age, I find it very difficult 
to wade through water. Could you give me a ride?" 
The young man replied, "As I am going to play with some youths 
over there, I am in a very great hurry and will not be able to take 
you with me. Besides, it would strain my horse too much, and he 
might be hurt." 
After saying this he went on ahead, alone, without even looking 
back. 
Thereupon Milarepa, with sincere concentration, entered the 
--- PAGE 180 ---
Samadhi of Guru-Union.1 Holding his breath he walked softly on 
the water, gliding smoothly across the stream to the other bank. He 
looked back and saw that the young man and the horse were floundering in midstream, making a big splash. In the meantime, the boy 
had noticed Milarepa walk past him on the water without sinking. 
Although he had seen it with his own eyes, he still could not accept 
it. He muttered to himself, "What's the matter with me? Am I having 
an hallucination? [If not,] this man must have been born to float!" 
When he reached the other bank, he approached Milarepa and 
observed his feet carefully, discovering that not even his soles were 
wet; whereupon, a deep faith toward the Jetsun arose within the 
youth. He cried out, "I did not realize that you were an accomplished 
Lama. I regret very much that I did not allow you to mount my 
horse. Please forgive me and accept my apology." Saying this, he 
bowed to Milarepa many times. With great sincerity and faith, he 
asked, "Lama, from whence do you come? To what Order do you belong? Who is your Guru? Where is your temple? What meditation 
do you practice? Where did you come from this morning? Where will 
you stay tonight?" In answer, the Jetsun sang: 
Ah! My good young friend! 
Listen to me, young playboy! 
Do you know who I am? I am the Yogi Milarepa; 
Gung Tang is whence I came. 
My feet have trod all over Weu and Tsang,2 
While learning the orders and decrees. 
From the gracious Guru Ngomi to Lama Rondonlaga, 
I have studied with ten Gurus and learned the 
Tantras five, 
The views, and the philosophies of Dharma. 
From my teacher, Lhaje Nu Chon, I learned 
The fierce exorcism of the Black and Red Planets. 
Though he was very expert, 
He could never clear my doubts. 
Then I heard people say there was a wondrous teacher 
Dwelling in the South, in the river-circled Valley. 
He was blessed by the Lords Naropa and Medripa, 
And had experienced the mother-like Essence of Mind. 
Having mastered the control of his body, 

--- PAGE 181 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
He dwelt alongside the South River. 
He, whose fame had spread afar 
Was the father Guru, Marpa the Translator. 
Just to hear his name caused my skin to 
tingle and my hair to rise. 
Despite the hardships of the journey, I made 
my way to him. 
Just by glancing at his face, my heart was changed. 
In my life, he is the only Guru, 
The peerless one, the gracious Lho Draug Wa.3 
No money or wealth had I to offer him, 
So I reduced my body to powder in his service. 
From him, I learned the profound Hevajra Tantra 
And the teachings of Nampa's Skillful Path.• 
I took the vows and won the Four Initiations 
of the blessed Dem Chog. 
When I realized the essence of Mahamudra, 
I saw plainly the real nature of the mind; 
I realized in full the ultimate "Beyond-all-Playwords." 
In the Four River-like Teachings5 of the 
Whispered Succession 
I practiced the profound doctrine of the 
Nine Essentials. 
Having practiced the art of manipulating 
the Na<;lis, Pral)a, and Bindu, 
I completely mastered both the mind and PraQa.8 
I am a yogi [who can] dwell in the sky; 
Having united the Four Elements, 
I have no fear of water. 
F~r your information, 
My temple is at Shri Ri. 
This morning I came from Upper Gog Tang; 
Where I shall go this evening, I am not certain, 
For mine is the yogi's way of life. 
Have you heard what I have sung, 
My happy boy who seeks nought but pleasure? 
--- PAGE 182 ---
After hearing this song, an unalterable faith in the Jetsun was established in the young man. His tears fell incessantly. He then handed the reins of his black horse to Milarepa, and sang: 
You are the Sage unrecognized, a man of 
the beyond! 
You are the Buddha whom one meets so rarely. 
Your instructions are the preaching of Nirmal).akaya. 
It seems that I have heard your name before, 
But yet I am not sure. 
It seems that I may have seen you before, 
But again, I am not sure. 
Whether the obeisance that I made you 
Was sincere enough, I do not know. 
If my questions were improper, my mien irreverent, 
I beg for your forgiveness, for I did not know you. 
This black horse of mine runs like the wind. 
On his neck hangs a wondrous bell; 
On his back of well-known pedigree 
Is a saddle cloth, most warm and smooth; 
On it rests a strong wooden saddle. 
The girth is fashioned of steel from Mon. 
A dainty knot adorns his reddish crupper; 
Close to the headstall of reddish-gray 
His forelock curls like a tiger's smile, 
Shining brightly like a mirrored star. 
Whip in hand, give your command; 
Shake the rein, he will obey and run. 
When he sees the flag before him 
He will win the race! 
When you cry "Run fast!" he'll gallop 
at full speed. 
To a man of the world, a good horse is his pride. 
I give you this fine horse as an offering, 
Praying that you may keep me from the hell 
Into which I else would fall. 
Having ended his song, the young man offered Milarepa his horse, 

--- PAGE 183 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
but the Jetsun would not accept it, and told him that he had another, even better one. And he sang: 
Listen to me, dear patron! 
A horse of Prai:~a-Mind have I; 
I adorn him with the silk scarf of Dhyana. 
His skin is the magic Ensuing Dhyana Stage/ 
His saddle, illuminating Self-Awareness. 
My spurs are the Three Visualizations,8 
His crupper the secret teaching of the Two Gates.9 
His headstall is the Prai:~a of Vital-force;10 
His forelock curl is Three-pointed Time.11 
Tranquillity within is his adornment, 
Bodily movement is his rein, 
And ever-flowing inspiration is his bridle. 
He gallops wildly along the Spine's Central Path. 
He is a yogi's horse, this steed of mine. 
By riding him, one escapes Sa111sara's mud, 
By following him one reaches the safe land of Bodhi. 
My dear patron, I have no need of your black horse. 
Go your way, young man, and look for pleasure! 
The youth thought, "Though he does not want my horse, his feet 
are bare. He must need a pair of shoes!" So thinking, he offered his 
own to Milarepa, singing: 
Revered Yogi, jewel-like accomplished Saint, 
Because there is no attachment in your heart, 
You wander aimless from place to place. 
Sometimes you meet dogs with sharp teeth; 
At others, you walk through brambles and defiles; 
And so your bare feet may be hurt. 
Walking without shoes is painful; 
These blue boots shall be your faithful servants. 
With brass spurs on their heels 
And silk-embroidered, they are costly; 
A skillful craftsman made them 
With the skins of elk, wild yale:, and crocodile. 

--- PAGE 184 ---
These boots are my mark, the mark of the young man, 
Which I now offer you. 
Pray, grant me your compassionate blessing. 
Thus he sang; but the Jetsun would not accept the gift. He told 
the boy that he had a better pair of boots, singing: 
Listen, you faithful young man. 
This land of darkness and blind views 
Is part of the Three Kingdoms of Saqisara. 
Full of mud is Craving Mead.ow, 
Full of thorns is Jealous Swamp. 
Savage and malignant is the furious dog of Hate, 
Dangerous and steep the hill of Pride. 
But I have crossed the Rivers Four12 
And reached the shore of the Pure Land. 
I cut my boots from the hide of the 
renunciation of Saqisara 
And with the leather of awakening from 
transciency and delusion. 
I made my boots with the craftsmanship 
of deep faith in Karma, 
With the dye of Non-clinging to the Myriad Forms, 
And with the thread and rope of Devotion; 
While the clasps are the Teachings of 
the Three Bindings.1a 
These are my boots, the boots of a yogi; 
I have no desire for yours. 
My dear patron, you may now leave for home. 
Then the young man said, "Revered One, though you will not 
take my' boots, I still would like to offer you my reddish-green jacket 
which is good to sleep in, for I see you have only a thin cloth with 
which to cover your body. You must feel cold all the time. Please 
accept this jacket!" In pleading with Milarepa to take it, the young 
man sang: 
Precious and accomplished Guru, 
Freed from Ego-clinging, 
You wander with no bourne in mind. 

--- PAGE 185 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
Sometimes you climb the summit of a mountain; 
Sometimes you sleep soundly in a city street. 
To wear a thin cloth sheet is the same as starving; 
It must be still worse unclad to suffer cold. 
This is my best tailored jacket 
Made of the reddish-green Mandari cloth. 
The front is silk, 
The lining of best quality. 
It is trimmed with lynx fur. 
A collar of otter-skin matches the hem, 
The shoulder pads are well embroidered. 
It is light to wear and grand to see. 
In it one does not fear a biting wind, 
For it is a noble's jacket. 
Please accept it, Reverend Father; 
Please bless me, and grant your grace. 
But 1\-lilarepa would not take the coat, and replied, "I have a jacket 
which excels even yours!" He then sang: 
Listen, you eloquent youth! 
O'er the cities of the Six Realms in Saq1sara, 
With fury blows the evil, Karmic wind. 
Driven by the senses and deprived of freedom, 
One wanders between life and death, roving in Bardo! 
Sometimes one climbs the summit of the mountain 
In the dream-like state between life and death. 
Sometimes one sleeps in the street 
In the Bardo city of Saq1sara. 
For my part, I aspire to the Realm of Reality, 
And adorn the cloth of pure mind and heart 
With the embroidery of immaculate discipline. 
Mindfulness is the tailor cutting 
My clothes into the shape of the Three Yogas. 
My coat lining is the art 
Of uniting the Three Key Points.H 
I brighten the shoulder padding 
With the Great Light [which shines at the 
time] of death. 

--- PAGE 186 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SO:-.iCS OF MILAREPA 
I cut the hem of Bardo Enlightenment 
To the "measurement" of pure Magic-Bodies.15 
This is my coat, the coat of a yogi; 
I have no wish for yours. 
Go then, young patron, and be cheerful! 
Said the young man, "Revered One, since you will not accept m)'' 
jacket though your clothes are still too thin, please, then, take this 
short coat." And he sang in persuasion: 
Precious Guru, supreme being, 
In the summer, in bright sunshine 
When the cuckoo's song is heard, 
One may go naked and not feel the cold. 
But in the winter, when the cold moon brightly shines 
And the blinding storm rages (in the hills], 
Cotton clothes than silk are thinner, 
And the' piercing cold stings like an arrow! 
Father Jetsun, this ordeal 
Is too much for you. 
Here is a gray-green woolen coat 
With maroon fur hemmed 
And gay in colored silk of five colors; 
The cloth is of fine quality. 
I now offer it to you. 
Please accept it and grant me your blessing. 
But Milarepa would not take it, saying that he had a better coat 
still. And he sang: 
Gracious patron, listen closely to me. 
With blindness as a guide 
I wandered down perilous paths; 
Buffeted by Passionate Winds,16 now hot, now cold, 
I was drenched in the rain of Retribution-Karma. 
Worn out by these ordeals, 
I longed for Freedom City. 
With the cloth of Ah Shea Vital Heat17 
Is the lapel of Four Cakras18 made. 
My tailor is the inner Pra~a-Mind 

--- PAGE 187 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
Who warms Tig Le18 and makes it Row; 
The merged Bliss-Void experience 
Is the needle used for sewing; 
The cloth is Inborn Vital Heat. 
Now summer and winter are for me the same! 
Though your woolen clothes are pretty, · 
t-'1y cotton shirt is lighter and gives more comfort. 
Dear patron, I do not want your clothes; 
You should now go home. 
The young man replied, "Although you will not accept my coat, 
you must be wearied by your long practice of meditation. Please be 
kind enough to accept my turban, which you can trade for some meat 
to sustain and nourish your body." And he sang: 
Precious Yogi, supreme one, 
Disgusted with Sarpsara, you look forward 
To liberation from the wheel of life-and-death. 
You meditate at length 
And practice your devotions. 
Thus you must sometimes feel the cold. 
My magnificent headgear 
Is the wonder of India! 
Its frame of precious metal was made by 
a skilled craftsman. 
'Tis covered with the skin of crocodile and vulture, 
And decked with the feathers of lovely birds. 
Its price equals the cost of a big Yak. 
I now offer it to you-the Nirmat:~akaya Buddha. 
You can trade it for much meat 
For your health and nourishment. 
In summer and in winter, 
I will follow and pay homage to you! 
But Milarepa did not accept this offer either. Instead, he sang: 
My dear young man, 
Do not lose your head! 
I follow the Great Naropa's Lineage, 
He who has completely mastered the art of 
cosmic causations. 

--- PAGE 188 ---
The master of deep practice, 
I fear not the element of air within, 
Nor do I depend on falcon's flesh. 
I feel gay and joyous in a biting wind. 
On the crown of my head20 
Is a jewel splendid as the sun and moon, 
On which sits my Guru, Marpa the Translator, 
Adorned with ornaments of human bone. 
He is the Wish-Fulfilling Gem, Buddha's 
Transformation Body. 
If you see him with the eye of veneration, 
You will find he is the Buddha Dorje-Chang! 
He will forever guard you like a son. 
This rare turban is my secret adornment. 
The sublime Guru on my head is very beautiful. 
Dear boy, I do not want a turban. 
Ride off with cheerful heart! 
The young man thought, "This revered Lama does not accept anything I have offered him. Perhaps he considers my gifts too small." 
And so he untied the string of his neck-jewel, which was a very fine 
piece of jade, and sang: 
Precious Guru, supreme being, 
You strive for devotion with no attachment 
in your heart. 
To you, all material things are but delusions! 
You have no wish for goods or wealth. 
A deep faith in you has risen of itself in me. 
'Tis shameful to begrudge one's father's hoardings; 
People would despise one from their hearts: 
One might well become a miser-ghost. 
Therefore, I pray your Reverence, 
Do not refuse this jade. 
This white translucent six-edged jade 
Gleams brightly like a sparkling light. 
The supple deer skin, and red poppy, 
Make the setting yet more graceful. 
With this jade you never can be poor. 
I offer it as a neck-ornament. 

--- PAGE 189 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
Pray, grant me your grace 
And bestow the Buddha's teaching. 
The boy then offered the jade to the Jetsun, but Milarepa still 
would not take it, saying, "I do not need your jade; I have a jewel 
which is far more precious. Listen to my song": 
Listen, my dear patron, 
You with a good father. 
In all countries, far and wide, 
I, the Yogi, roam. 
In streets, at doors, I beg for food. 
I am not greedy for good meals, 
I long not for possessions. 
There is no end to human greed. 
Even with hoarded wealth head-high, 
One cannot reach contentment. 
I do not envy you your wealth and goods. 
The greatest treasure is contentment in my heart; 
The teaching of the Whispered Lineage is 
my wealth; 
My devotion to the Dharma is my ornament. 
I deck myself with Retaining Mindfulness;21 
The Yogas of Four Periods are my entertainment; 
The great and small Mind-Awarenesses are my 
adorations. 
I have no need for your neck-jade. 
Dear boy, be of good cheer and go your way. 
The young man 
thought, "Is it because I am too great a sinner 
that His Reverence will not be gracious to me?" He said to Milarepa, 
"It is natural for a supreme being like you not to want these illusory possessions. I now offer you my Three Companions.22 From 
now on I will never carry a weapon or kill sentient beings. I beg you 
to grant me the Ordination. I pray you to protect me with your compassionate grace!" Saying this, he untied his carrying pouch23 and sang: 
Oh supreme and compassionate Lama, 
I have always seen an enemy as such, 
And never lost sight of my foes. 

--- PAGE 190 ---
From the right, I untie my wooden quiver; 
From the left, I take my ornate bow, 
And the sharp sword at my waist 
Which disillusioned all my foes! 
With these three things at my side, 
I was like a ruthless bandit. 
When I appeared before my enemies 
Their hearts trembled and their bodies quivered. 
Like frightened yaks, they fled away! 
Thinking of them and my misdeeds 
I feel regret and sorrow. 
Today I offer you my Three Companions. 
I will observe the precepts strictly 
And follow you where' er you go. 
But Milarepa was still adamant. He said, "I do not think that 
you can keep your oath. Nor do I need your Three Companions, 
because mine are better. Now, hearken to my song": 
Listen to me, dauntless fighter. 
The Five Hostile Poisons24 run wild 
In the land of evil thoughts. 
He who does not renounce the "all-important" combat, 
Will be imprisoned and lose his chance for freedom! 
Battles and armies are not for the yogi. 
The world without is my quiver, 
The Non.clinging Self-Illumination within 
Is my sheath of leopard skin, 
My weapon is the sword of Great Wisdom. 
The Two-in-One Path is my rope, 
My thumb-guard is the merit of meditation. 
These are my hidden inner meanings. 
Upon the bow-string of Ultimate Unborn Voidness 
I set steady the notch of Bodhi-Heart; 
I shoot the arrow of the Four Infinities25 
At the army of the Five Poisons. 
There is no doubt that I shall win the battle; 
I will destroy the hostile enemies of desire. 

--- PAGE 191 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
That is my way, the yogi's way of conquering. 
I have no interest in your gifts. 
Young patron, be of good cheer and go. 
The young man said, "Revered Sir! Though you do not accept my 
offer of the Three Companions, I must receive your Blessing. Please, 
therefore, accept my belt20 and knife." And he sang: 
You Yogi, who are the living Buddha, 
Although many know the Dharma, 
Few can practice it. 
One in hundreds is hard to find 
Who can give proof of his accomplishment. 
I would not ask the teaching from another, 
E'en though he knew a world of Dharma; 
Only from you, the living Buddha, the Father Repa, 
Your teachings spring from much hard work, 
And so I dare not ask without paying first. 
In the center of Nepal, an angry river flows, 
With clouds like pillars standing round. 
At the lion-head of this raging torrent 
Was made this sheath with silver ornaments, 
Slung on my belt with gold and silver cord. 
When I wear it, my whole body brightens! 
I now offer you this knife and belt. 
Later, I will ask you for the Teachings. 
The youth then gave his belt and knife to Milarepa. The Jetsun 
said, "At present, I cannot give you the Teachings and instruction; 
neither do I want your offerings. I have a better belt than yours. 
Listen to my song": 
Listen to me, ingenuous young man! 
From my hut's roof in the snow mountain 
Flows the quintessence of milk and nectar. 
Though it is not made of gold or jewels, 
I would not pour it into earthenware. 
Around this waist of mine, the poor man 
of strong will, 
Is tied to a cotton belt of fanatic devotion! 
The absence of pretence and hypocrisy 

--- PAGE 192 ---
Is the pattern of my belt. 
Bright wisdom is my knife, 
Its sheath, the confidence of the Three 
MeasurementsP 
Faith and diligence in Dharma is my gold-andsilver cord. 
The beauty of the Dharma is the glory over all. 
Lest goddesses punish me, 
I have never asked for wealth or money 
When teaching in the past, 
Nor shall I do so now. 
Dear boy, you may go home; 
I do not want your gifts. 
The young man again said to Milarepa, "Revered Sir! Indeed you 
have not the slightest desire for wealth or goods. Therefore, I think 
that you may not object to my offering you a temple in a quiet 
place wherein you may dwell." Saying this he sang: 
You are a real yogi, an ascetic worker, 
Disgusted with mundane things 
And indifferent to the world. 
You renounced your native land and went away! 
Without a bourne in mind, you wandered everywhere. 
Although one thing to you is as another, 
A permanent home may help your inspiration. 
Let us find a good place in the hills to 
build a temple, 
Let us make the pillars immaculate and tall! 
Hanging above the pillars, the sun and moon 
will shine. 
On the broad floor of the temple 
We will draw a Mandal28 with stone-made colors. 
We will plant flowers all about 
And dig a deep ditch round. 
The Ka Be ornaments29 will be of wood, 
And a pagoda with eight adornments will 
make the place more beautiful. 

--- PAGE 193 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
There will be a shrine for worship and 
great reverence. 
Pray, accept it as your dwelling. 
Then at ease, you may stay in comfort there! 
But Milarepa still would not accept this offer. He said, "I will not 
stay in any temple and make it my home. Nor do I know anything 
about how to please people. Now, listen": 
My confused young lad! 
Do you not know that this world is transient 
and unreal? 
When you come before the King of the Dead 
Your rich man's money is of no avail. 
There your wealth can never buy you off; 
There you will find no place to swing a 
strong man's sword, 
No place to dance or strut about the stage. 
Your flesh will be as dust. 
Because I fear these things may happen to me, 
I bind myself in a place of strict austerity. 
The temple wherein I dwell in the inner unborn Mind; 
The Ka Be ornament is unwavering Pral)a; 
I erect the pillars of the Real 
On the foundation of immutability. 
The sun and moon are the Arising and Perfecting Yoga. 
On the ground of the Dhyanic W armth30 
I draw a Mandai of Clear Observation.31 
The experiences of Bliss, Illumination, and 
Non-thought 
Are the lovely flowers in my garden! 
Encircling the pagoda of Ten Virtues 
Is my strong ditch of Voidness. 
This is mine, the Yogi's temple; 
I have no need of yours. 
My young patron, be of good cheer and go! 
The young man said to Milarepa, "Revered Sir, though you do 
not want the temple, this feeble human body is liable to sickness. 

--- PAGE 194 ---
I have a very capable sister, who has great faith in the Dharma. I 
would like to offer her to you as a Jomo32 servant. Pray do not disdain, but please accept this offer." And he sang: 
Revered Yogi, who clings to the hermitage, 
Though you have fully realized the faults of women, 
And have no lustful wish, 
This fragile human body is liable to sickness 
And so one always needs a solicitous companion. 
I offer you my only sister, 
Dearly beloved of her three brothers. 
She is sprung from an outstanding lineHer father and mother are of noble stock; 
She is heiress to a royal tradition. 
Do not mistakenly regard her as of common stock; 
She is the heart-taker among the crowds, 
Radiant as a rainbow, she is more beautiful 
than angels. 
Cotton clothes on her, 
Look lovelier than silk. 
Jewelry and gold adorn her head; 
Sparkling jewels and pearl necklaces 
Cannot match her radiant beauty; 
Her grace and charm are hard to paint. 
Her suitors have been many, 
But to none have we given our consent. 
Today, I offer her to you, the Nirmal)akaya of Buddha. 
Pray do not disdain my offer. 
But Milarepa still would not accept it. He said "Do not talk like 
a fool. I have already renounced family ties. I am not interested in 
an ego-clinging woman. The so-called faith of the common people 
is most unstable and liable to change. I am an old beggar with no 
family and no relatives. People will laugh at you, if you give her to 
me. Afterwards, you will regret what you have done. I have no desire to become your brother-in-law. I have a consort who is much better than your sister. Listen": 
On the whole, young lord, 
Women are the cause of lust and attachment. 
A qualified Illumination-Woman33 is indeed 
most rare. 

--- PAGE 195 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
Ta have angelic company on the Bodhi-Path 
Is a wonder and a marvel; 
Yet you a little have exaggerated. 
This is why the Mudrii Practice34 is so very hard. 
My wonder woman is the lust-free Siinyata. 
There is compassion on her face, 
And kindness in her smile. 
The Red and White Elements35 are her clothing, 
The Two-in-One Unity, her silk ornaments. 
Indiscriminating action is her girdle 
And the Four Blisses36 her adornments. 
Her necklace makes all things Taste-as-One. 
She is such a charming witchThe realization of Truth is her origin! 
This is my wife, the yogi's mate. 
I have no interest in your SaJTISaric women. 
Young patron, it is time for you to go! 
Knowing that Milarepa would not accept this offer, the young man 
said, "Although to your enlightened mind, there is no such thing as 
shame or disgrace, to be human and to prevent possible scandal among 
the people, I now sincerely offer you a pair of trousers. Please accept them." And he sang: 
You Yogi, you who have nothing left to hide, 
But follow the Tantric path, 
Living naked in the mountainsYour jewel-like penis, exposed so openly, 
Can be seen by all at any time. 
Though you are free from all ideas of disgrace 
and shame, 
We worldly men are shamed by indecent exposure. 
Even the perfect Buddha, the fully enlightened 
Being, 
Discreetly follows worldly customs. 
This pair of trousers are for my own wear; 
They are made of the finest wool 
Which my mother and sister spun. 
My noble wife wove it into woolen cloth, 
A neighbor's daughter dyed it for me; 

--- PAGE 196 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
And my kind uncle tailored it. 
With such clothes we cover the shameful part. 
To you, this pair of trousers I now offer. 
Please say not again, "I need it not!" 
Milarepa replied, "Dear boy, it seems that you know nothing about 
shame! My organ hangs there very naturally. There is nothing funny 
about it, so why do you laugh? In the beginning, I came from my 
mother's belly stark naked. When death comes, I shall leave the body· 
without any covering. And so I shall do nothing about it now. Nor 
do I care to know about this self-made "shame" of yours, as you call it. 
Now listen": 
Why, my good lad, do you take 
Things without shame to be shameful? 
That is merely the nature-born male organ; 
I cannot understand this so-called "shame" of yours. 
Of the really shameful things, you are most ignorant. 
Look at sinful, evjl, and meaningless deeds; 
You are not ashamed of them. 
Let me tell you how I keep my self-respect: 
My fine wool is the Heart-for-Bodhi 
With which I spin the thread of Four Initiations;87 
The cloth I weave is the liberation Path of Samadhi; 
The dye I use is made of virtues and good-wishes; 
My tailor uncle is the sense of conscientious discretion 
By whom the trousers of self-respect are made. 
These are my dignified and altruistic trousers, 
And so of yours I have no need! 
Dear patron, you may now go home! 
The youth thought, "This great man will not accept anything I 
offer. I had better find out where he lives and where he is going. 
I will try by all possible means to persuade him to visit my country.'' 
So he said: 'Though you have not accepted anything I have offered 
you, please come to my country; also, please tell me where you are 
going now. There must be a destination in your mind, or you would 

--- PAGE 197 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
not choose this particular road. Pray do not conceal your intention, 
but please tell me the truth." 
Milarepa replied, "Son, I have nothing to hide from you. In the 
harvest I go to Din Ri to beg for alms. When the crops are threshed, 
I go to Nya Non. In the winter I remain at some remote place where 
only birds and marmots dwell." The young man thought, "After a 
few days, I shall invite him to my house to preach for us. I wonder 
if he will accept." And he sang: 
Peerless Guru, the Transformation Body of Buddha, 
You said that you are going to Din Ri to beg 
for alms. 
But that is a place of the damned, and has no merit. 
Though vast sky hangs above, 
The virtue of the people there 
I.s as small as mustard-seed; 
Their hands are tighter than the barred 
doors of the congregation hall!38 
The flour costs more than gold. 
A hundred pleas for alms are wasted time; 
Poverty and famine stalk the place. 
The land of Nya Non is full of fear, 
A paradise for bandits and murderers. 
Lepers are there in crowds, 
While burial grounds and cemeteries abound. 
So fearful is that country, one dares 
Not travel without a hundred friends, 
Or take three steps without a guide. 
That cursed place, Nya Non, is of the worst repute. 
The Nepalese-Tibetan border is cold and highA land of snow where blizzards rage. 
Its people are as dumb as mules! 
Its rivers flow south to Nepal, 
Where the lower valleys steam with heat 
And dangerous rope bridges sway high above 
the rocks. 
In Nepal heat and disease endanger life, 
While people in the South speak a different tongue, 
And the trees are stiff like corpses. 
With all my heart, I wish you would not go there, 
So please postpone your journey. 

--- PAGE 198 ---
Although you would not take my gifts, 
I beg that you will grant my boon 
And visit my country for a fortnight. 
Milarepa replied, "On the whole, I cannot tolerate arrogant patrons. 
I am not interested in going to your country. As for Nya Non and 
Din Ri, I know them better than you. Hearken to my song": 
You arrogant young man with strong desires, 
Listen to my song with faith. 
It is hard to meet an immaculate man of merit, 
Hard to find a place where men of virtue live, 
For times have changed. 
I am a yogi who thinks and says whate'er he likes, 
But I have never caused malicious gossip. 
Though the flour be very dear in Din Ri, 
It is not hard for me to get it. 
Yet I prefer the taste of the Five Nectars, 
And never gorge myself with tasty morsels. 
I am an abandoned yogi, who eats for food 
The inner Samadhi of Non-discernment. 
Thus the desire for tasty meals has no appeal. 
Cheerful and comfortable am I in times of famine. 
Though the paths are perilous and dreadful, 
My prayer to the Gracious One will never fail me. 
The Three Precious Ones are my safest shelter 
and refuge; 
The goddesses in the Three Places will always 
be my guides. 
My inseparable companion is the Bodhi-Mind; 
My protectors are the Guards of the Eight Divisions. 
Since I have no possessions, I have no enemy. 
Cheerful and at ease I meet the bandits. 
Though Nya Non may be of bad repute, 
The people there are candid and ingenuous. 
As in days of old, they are straightforward 
and outspoken. 

--- PAGE 199 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
Easy-going and carefree, 
They eat and drink without pretension; 
They keep things as they are, 
And groves and forests flourish. 
As for me, I take no interest in worldly wealth, 
Nor am I attached to food and drink. 
Contented, I care not for loitering and amusement. 
When, therefore, I meditate, my Samadhi deepens. 
This is why I go to Nya Non. 
Having mastered the art of Dumo's F.ire,89 
I have no fear of cold or heat; 
Cheerful and in comfort I meet the falling snow. 
Today I see no reason to delay my journey, 
But I shall not go to your country; 
Proud and haughty patrons are distasteful to me. 
How can I ingratiate myself with those I do not know 7 
Mount your hor~e. as it is growing late. 
My dear, contented youth, it is time for you to go. 
May your health be good and your life long. 
Upon hearing this song of rejection, the young man was overcome 
with dejection and disappointment. He said, "Revered Sir, whatever I 
have offered you, you would not accept. Whatever instruction I have 
applied for, you would not grant. I realize that I am too sinful. I 
now swear that I will not go anywhere, but will kill myself here in 
your sight." So saying, he drew his razor-sharp knife, and, pressing 
the point against his heart, sang: 
Listen to me, Revered Yogi, 
On this auspicious morning, while riding on my way, 
I saw a naked man, lying beside a silver spring. 
I said, "Is he a mad yogi, 
Or just a foolish joker? 
Exposing his naked body without shame, 
He must be a fool out of his mind!" 
And so, not faith, but contempt arose within me. 
I rejected any thought of your companionship 
and went on alone. 

--- PAGE 200 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
Of this, you, Revered One, were clearly well aware. 
As if wounded badly, I now repent in pain. 
When you were crossing the blue river 
To reach the seat of the other shore, 
I saw you fly over the water 
Like an eagle in the sky. 
Soaring like wind in space, 
I saw you flying. 
Displaying your miraculous powers, 
I saw you glide over the Tsang River 
And reach the other shore. 
I was bewildered and overjoyed 
To see such an accomplished being. 
Proud and happy as I was, conceit arose 
within me; 
I thought that I was a well-gifted person, 
Who had few hindrances and habit-forming thoughts. 
I thought that I must be a good vessel 
for the Dharma; 
I thought that I must be a virtuous and 
destined person, 
Who had great merits and pure wishes.40 
Since the day that I was born, 
I have never been so happy as today. 
In the wealth, property, and comfort that I offered 
You have not the slightest interest. 
I have never heard of a yogi like you in Tibet; 
I have never met such a perfect Buddhist, 
One so marvelous and unusual. 
On this auspicious day in my pilgrimage, 
I made offerings and besought you in all ways! 
Marvelous and unusual as you are, 
You have paid no heed to what I said. 
I feel that I am most ignorant and pitiful. 
I realize that I am stupid and lack merit; 
I am utterly confused and most disheartened. 
With a feeling of frustration, I have lost my way. 
I am beginning to believe I have no capacity 
for Dharma! 

--- PAGE 201 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
What then would be the use and meaning 
Should one chance to meet a Buddha, 
If from Him one does not receive a discourse? 
How can one face, and what can one tell one's 
countrymen? 
Rather than return in shame 
I will end my life before you! 
All are bound to die in time; 
'Tis better for me now to die, 
To die before such an accomplished saint, 
When my heart is full of Dharma. 
Oh, all-compassionate, revered Jetsun! 
After hearing such a sorry tale from this poor lad, 
With your omniscient mind, you know what 
should be said. 
Having heard his sincere prayer, Milarepa thought: "He has indeed 
great earnestness and sincerity. There must be a mutual vow41 between us. The prophecy given by the goddess in my dream seems 
to point to him. I must, therefore, accept him." And so he sang: 
Listen to me, dear young patron! 
You have a zealous aspiration for virtuous deeds. 
You must be a man with little sin or evil Karma. 
Since you have intense longing to solicit 
Dharma [from me] 
Your pride and self-conceit must be small indeed! 
Diligent and enthusiastic, 
You cannot be lazy. 
Since you made generous offerings, 
You cannot be close or greedy. 
Your intelligence and sympathy are good, 
So you have little ignorance or hate. 
Since you pay respect and homage to me, 
You must have been closely associated 
With Dharma in your previous lives! 
On this auspicious morning, I, the 
vagabond from Gung Tang, 

--- PAGE 202 ---
And you, the young man from lower Jhal Khrum 
Met on this blue river bank. 
It seems our hopes in bygone lives arranged 
the meeting; 
It was our destiny to meet before the Silver Spring. 
You must be one whose Karma is unstained, 
\Vho has awakened from the habitual-thought 
of the Store-Consciousness. 
Young patron, I sing this auspicious song for you. 
Since you have heard authentic teaching, 
Will you now be keen to practice Dharma? 
If faith has risen from your heart, 
If you take no heed of worldly gain, 
If you really want to follow me, 
Know that kinsmen are the devil-planned 
hindrances of Dharma; 
Think not of them as real, but quench your 
craving for them. 
Money and dainties are the devil's envoys; 
Association with them is pernicious. 
Renounce them and all other things that bind you. 
Delight in pleasures is the devil's rope; 
Think, then, of death to conquer your desires. 
Young companions are the tempting devil's snare; 
Knowing they are delusive, watch them carefully. 
One's native land is the dungeon of the devil; 
Imprisoned therein 'tis hard 
To win liberation. 
Try then to escape at once; 
Put all aside and strive for Dharma. 
Only by instant action can you succeed! 
In time your body of illusion will decay. 
'Tis better to associate with Dharma now. 
The darting bird of mind will fly up anyway; 
'Tis better now to wing your way to Heaven! 

--- PAGE 203 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
If you believe and follow what I have said, 
You will be a worthy vessel for the Dharma. 
You will be given benediction and instruction; 
The profound teachings of the Whispered Lineage 
Will also be imparted. 
My son! lbis is the start of your journey 
on the Bodhi-Path. 
Even I, the Yogi, rejoice at your success. 
You too, young man, should be glad and joyful! 
The youth was indescribably happy when he heard this song. With 
great exhilaration, he bowed down at the Jetsun's feet, made many 
obeisances, and circumambulated him many times. Then he made a 
vow [to return], and departed. 
Four months later, when Milarepa was staying at Manlun Chubar 
of Drin, the young man came with his nephew to visit him. The 
uncle offered a piece of immaculate white jade, and the nephew half an 
ounce of gold, but the Jetsun would not accept the gifts. 
At that time, the Translator Bhari was building a stupa of the 
Tsudor Namjhal Buddha at Drin, so Milarepa said to them, "It is 
not necessary for me to take your offerings; you may offer them to Bhari, 
the Translator, and ask him to initiate you. As for the Pith-Instructions,42 I shall give them to you myself." 
Accordingly, they went to Bhari, the Translator, and asked him to 
impart to them the complete initiation of Dem Chog. Whereupon, 
Bhari bestowed upon them the Outer Teachings of Tsudor Namjhal, 
the Me Ru Sinha practice for prolonging life, and the teachings of 
the Buddha of Performance. He also gave them the Inner Teachings 
of Dem Chog, that is, the Practice of Seven Words, the instructions 
of the Guru Symbol Goddess, and the meditation practice of the 
Goddess Kurukulla. After that they accompanied him to Sajya Monastery.43 
Then the lad returned to Milarepa and lived with him for five 
years. From the Jetsun, he obtained the teaching of the renowned 
Six Yogas of Naropa, and the teaching of the Mahamudra transmitted from the Great Master Medripa. Because he practiced these 
teachings diligently, Milarepa also imparted to him all the Pith-Instructions. Formerly, the young man had been called Dharma Wonshu;44 later, Milarepa gave him another name, Repa Shiwa Aui [the 
Cotton-clad Light of Peace]. Before turning to religion, he was a 
great sensualist; afterwards, for the sake of his devotion, he utterly 

--- PAGE 204 ---
renounced the world. He took an oath before Milarepa that for the 
rest of his life, he would never wear leather shoes, or more than one 
piece of cotton clothing, and that he would not return to his native 
land, or secure provisions for more than two days' consumption. With 
the greatest diligence he absorbed himself in his devotions and eventually attained good experiences. Milarepa was delighted with his improvement and sang: 
I bow down to all Gurus. Great is the blessing 
From the compassionate Gurus of the 
Practice Lineage;45 
Great and powerful are the Key-Instructions 
of Marpa and Mila! 
You, Shiwa Aui, are industrious and hard-working. 
Through the grace of the I)akinis you have 
attained good understanding. 
Dear son, if you want to consummate your meditation, 
Restrain yourself from bigotry and empty talk; 
Think not of the noble glories of the past; 
Stay in the valley to which no men come; 
Keep from bad companions, and yourself examine; 
Yearn not to become a Guru; 
Be humble and practice diligently; 
Never hope quickly to attain Enlightenment, 
But meditate until you die. 
Forgetting words and studies, 
Practice the Key-Instructions. 
If you would benefit yourself, 
Renounce talk and words; 
Concentrate on your devotions. 
Shiwa Aui replied, "You have just said that he who learns a great 
deal without actual practice is liable to go astray. Please elaborate this 
a little." 
Milarepa answered, "By that, I mean there is a danger of clinging 
to the worldly affairs of this life without completely renouncing them. 
Another danger is that this person is liable to miss the key-point of 
the practice. In the teaching of Marpa's Line, we do not have such 
.errors or dangers, for we never pay attention to words and talk. What 
we emphasize is the actual practice. Hearken to my 'Song of Dangers 
and Fallacies'": 

--- PAGE 205 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
Obeisance to the holy Gurus. 
Listen to those high-flown words, and pompous talk; 
Look at those charlatans, madly engaged 
in fervent argument. 
In talk they seem intent to frighten you; 
In sleep, they slumber, pompous men; 
They walk like haughty Mongols. 
Dangers and obstacles encompass them. 
The Three Kingdoms and Six Realms are jeopardized 
By desires forever leading sentient beings 
into danger. 
There are seven dangers you should watch: 
Falling into the blissful Hinayana peace;46 
Using your Buddhist knowledge to get food; 
Inflating yourself with pride of priesthood; 
Falling into yogic-madness;47 
Indulging in empty speeches; 
Falling into the trap of nothingness. 
Thus, ignorance is the cause of fallacies and dangers. 
The teaching of the Whispered Lineage 
is the Oakinis' breath. 
Never doubt this truth, but if you do, 
Remember that this doubt occurred 
Through the devil's influence. 
Shiwa Aui, how can you ever go astray 
Since you are near me, the great Cotton-clad One? 
Lay down your doubts and meditate. 
He who relies on the true Teachings will 
never go astray. 
Think not, my son, of meaningless word-knowledge 
But concentrate on your devotions. 
Then you will soon attain the great Accomplishment. 
Whereupon, Shiwa Aui abandoned his search for word-knowledge 

--- PAGE 206 ---
and concentrated on his· devotions with never a thought for clothing 
and food. 
One day a friend called on Shiwa Aui. Seeing his body emaciated 
from lack of food and clothing, the friend misunderstood, and feeling 
pity for him, said, "Dharma Wonshu, you were a gay spark from a 
rich family. But now you look old and poor, with no clothes or food. 
How sad! How sad!" Shiwa Aui sang in reply: 
Oh My Father Guru, the Jetsun, the real Buddha, 
The Field-of-Offering48 for my parents! 
Brothers, sisters, and all [relatives] give 
rise to Sa111sara; 
But I have now renounced them. 
The Jetsun is my sole companion and comrade 
in the Dharma, 
Alone he is my source for the Buddha's Teaching; 
With him, the real Buddha, I remain in solitude. 
A group of three or four leads but to empty talk, 
To avoid which I stay in solitude. 
Books and commentaries bring one nought but 
pride, 
But the authentic Buddha gives 
The one-sentence Pith-Instruction. 
I thus renounce all books and commentaries, 
Relying on the clear-cut Pith-Instruction. 
The hermit-temple is a place near Buddha 
Wherein I practice virtuous deeds and gather merits. 
The more one has, the more one craves. 
So I forsake my home and renounce my native land. 
The country with no boundary-posts is the 
place near Buddha 
Wherein the faithful one can practice virtuous deeds. 
Associates and servants cause more anxiety 
and craving, 
So I renounce them for all time. 

--- PAGE 207 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
A deep faith arose within the man after he had listened to this 
song of his former friend, whereupon he offered him many good 
things. Milarepa was very much pleased by this incident. 
From that time on, Shiwa Aui served Milarepa until the day of 
his Guru's entering into Nirval)a. During the course of his life, he 
learned the complete teachings from Milarepa, and thus was kept 
from going astray in his meditation experience and understanding. 
The nephew, known as the foolish and powerful Sang Jye Jhab, 
did not act as a good Repa. He held a small temple near the edge 
of Nya Non. The Jetsun was slightly displeased with him. 
After the Nirval)a of Milarepa, Shiwa Aui went to the cave of 
Man Chu in the Gob Valley of Padru to practice meditation. Eventually he attained the Perfect Enlightenment and merits of the Path. 
He achieved the Accomplishment-of-Freedom-from-Obstacles49 and so 
was able to pass through the rocks of the cave and mount to the 
Pure Land of Goddesses in his lifetime. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting his disciple, the Cotton-clad 
Shiwa Aui, at Silver Spring. 
NOTES 
1 Samadhi of Guru-Union (T.T.: bLa.Mahi.rNal.hByor.): A Samadhi of unifying one's mind with those of the Gurus. 
2 Weu and Tsang (T.T.:dWus.gTsafi): VVeu is a region in Central Tibet, 
Tsang is a region in southwestern Tibet. 
3 Lho Draug Wa was another of Marpa's names. 
4 Skillful Path: the Yoga with Fom1 (T.T.: Thabs.Lam.) See the translator's comments in the Appendix. 
5 The Four River-like Teachings are probably: (1) the Teaching of the 
Arising Yoga, (2) the Teaching of the Six Yogas, (3) the Teaching of the advanced 
Perfecting Yoga, and (4) the Teaching of Mahamudra. "River-like" implies that 
these teachings convey continual grace-waves. 
6 See Story 3, Note 2. 
7 Ensuing Dhyana Stage: Every Dhyana has two stages: the Main, and the 
Ensuing Stage. In the Main Dhyana Stage, the mind of the yogi is wholly absorbed 
in concentration. In the Ensuing Dhyana Stage, while the yogi continues his 
daily activities, his mind is still held somewhat in contemplation, i.e., not completely departing from the meditation experience. 
8 Three Visualizations: This probably implies the following practices: the vis-

--- PAGE 208 ---
ualization (1) of the Patron Buddha, (2) of the Ma~c;lala, and (3) of the inner 
Cakras. 
9 Two Gates: Yoga with Form and Yoga without Form. 
10 Pra~a of Vital-force, or Life Pra~a (T.T.: Srog.Riun): This is the chief 
Pra~a which supports one's life and which also, according to Tibetan Tantra, is 
the energy-source of the Alaya (Store) Consciousness. 
11 This phrase is not clear to the translator. It probably implies the three favorable times for practicing meditation. 
12 Four Rivers: a symbolic term denoting the four stages of Sarpsaric becomings: production, remaining, decaying, and termination. 
13 Three Bindings: the term for the teachings directed toward taming the 
body, word, and mind. 
14 Three Key Points: to unite the mind with the Manifestation-Void (T.T.: 
sNaii.sToii.), with the Bliss-Void (T.T.: bDe.sToii.), and with the llluminatingVoid (T.T.: Rig.sToft.). 
15 The Sambhogakaya and the Nirma~akaya. 
16 Passionate Winds: a figurative term to denote the changeable emotions of 
men. 
17 See Story 7, Note 24. 
18 Four Cakras: the psychic centers of the head, throat, heart, and navel. 
19 Tig Le (Bindu): male semen and female "blood." 
20 An important psychic center situated at the top of the head. 
21 Retaining Mindfulness: the remembering of meditation-experience during 
daily activities. 
22 Three Companions: Bow, arrow, and sword were the three companions 
(safeguards) of Tibetan travelers in ancient times. 
23 Carrying pouch: The scabbard and quiver were fastened to the belt, along 
with a pouch in which miscellaneous articles were carried. 
24 See Story 7, Note 6. 
25 The Four Infinities, or the Four Unlimited Good Wills, i.e., Unlimited 
Friendliness, Compassion, Sympathetic Joy, and Evenmindness. 
26 See Note 23. 
27 This probably implies the three standards by which the yogi judges his experience in meditation, i.e., whether the experience is in accord with the Siitras, 
whether it enhances or weakens his compassion toward sentient beings, and whether it enlarges his understanding of Siinyata. 
28. Mandai: The translator presumes that "Mandai," pronounced as "Mandral" 
by the Tibetans, is a corruption of the Sanskrit word "Ma~c;lala." See Story 7, 
Note 14. 
29 Ka Be (T.T.: Kha.Bad.): an architectural ornament of Tibetan houses placed 
forward by the projecting ends of the beams which support the roof. 
30 Dhyanic Warmth: the heat produced in meditation practice. 
31 Clear observation (T.T.: IHag.mThon.): deep contemplation on the truth of 
Praj1iliparamita. 
32 Jomo: the wife of a lay preacher. 
33 Illumination-Woman (Tib.: Rig.Ma.): a woman who is well-gifted in understanding and in practicing Tantrism. 

--- PAGE 209 ---
The Meeting at Silver Spring 
34 Mudra Practice: an advanced form of Heat Yoga. 
35 Red and White Elements: the positive and negative energies. 
36 Four Blisses: When the Tig Le, the essence of energy, comes down from the 
Head Center, it successively produces four blisses, namely, the First Bliss, the Su· 
perlative Bliss, the Beyond-Reach Bliss, and the Innate-Born Bliss. See the trans· 
lator's book, "Teachings of Tibetan Yoga." 
37 Four Initiations: the Vase, the Secret, the Wisdom, and the Symbolic 
Initiations. See Story 1, Note 7. 
38 The doors of the congregation hall in Tibetan monasteries are kept closed 
and locked most of the time. 
39 Dumo's Fire: the "mystic" fire or heat produced in the Navel Center. 
40 The pure wishes for Dharma made in one's previous existence. 
41 If two person have made a mutual vow in their previous lives, the force of 
this vow, or the Karma-of-Wishes will bring its fulfillment in a future life. 
42 Pith-Instructions (T.T.: Man.J\Iag. or gDams.J\Iag.): This may also be rendered as Key-Instructions, which consist of the essence of the Tantric teaching con· 
veyed from Guru to disciple, usually in a very simple, precise, yet practical form, 
and therefore termed "Pith-Instructions." 
43 Sajya (T.T.: Sa.sKya.) Monastery: the main monastery of Sajyaba (the 
Gray School). 
44 Lit. (T.T.): Shu.Yas.Dar.Ma.dWaft.Phyug. 
45 Practice Lineage (T.T.: sGrub.brGyud.): This is another name for the 
Ghagyuba School because this School stresses meditation practice. 
46 According to Mahayana Buddhism, the Hinayana's version of NirvaJ:Ja 
and Samadhi is shallow, insufficient, limitative, and negative, in contrast to that of 
Mahayana, which is positive and dynamic. To cling to the blissful serenity of Sa· 
madhi is a great danger that may lead one to fall into the Hinayana Path. 
47 Yogic madness: There is a recognized "stage of insanity" which all yogis 
should overcome before final or complete Enlightenment. This reference is to the 
danger of falling into this so-called "spiritual insanity" of advanced yogis. 
48 Field of Offering: a term which denotes the qualified receiver of offerings, 
such as the Guru, Buddha, or the enlightened sages. These offerings will ripen into 
the giver's merits as seeds sown in good soil. 
49 Freedom-from-Obstacles (T.T.: Zan.Thal.): Advanced yogis who have per· 
fectly mastered their PraJ:Ja·Mind are supposed to be able to pass through all con· 
crete, material obstacles without difficulty. This accomplishment is called Zaft.Thal. 

--- PAGE 210 ---
THE SONG OF THE STAFF 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
H
AVING renounced all worldly belongings and material things, the 
Jetsun Milarepa's only possession was a cane staff. One day, carrying his staff, Milarepa and his disciple Sevan Repa went to Jen Valley 
for alms. They came to a barred house, which was near the bank of 
the river. Except for an old woman, not a living soul was there. 
Milarepa asked her for alms. She said, "I am a pennyless old woman; 
but across the field there is a rich man called Shangchub Bar, who 
is working on his farm. Go there and ask him, and your wish will be 
granted." 
When they arrived at the rich man's house, they saw that he was 
sorting seeds for sowing. Milarepa said, "My dear patron, we were 
told that you are a rich man, so we come here to you for alms." The 
man replied, "It is pleasant to offer you alms; but, if you are a real 
yogi, you should understand the symbolic meaning of things and be 
able to preach an exemplary sermon. Now, please use my farming as 
a parable, and sing me a preaching song." Thereupon, the Jetsun and 
Sevan sang together: 
Oh, my proud and arrogant patron, 
Listen to me, you rich man of Ngan Tson. 
In this month of spring the peasants 
Of Tibet are busy on their farms. 
I, the Yogi, also farm. 
Upon the bad field of desires, 
I spread the fertilizer of the Preparatory Practice;1 
I wet the field with manure of the Five Nectars;2 
I plant the seeds of the Non-confusing Mind, 
Farming with discriminative thought. 
--- PAGE 211 ---
The Song of the Staff 
I plow with Non-dualistic oxen 
Harnessed to the Wisdom-Plow, 
With Observation of Precepts as the nose-rope, 
And Non-distraction Effort as the girth. 
Diligence is my whip, and skill my bridle. 
With these tools and efforts, the bud of Bodhi sprouts; 
In due season ripe will be my fruit. 
You are a farmer who grows annual crops; 
For eternity I cultivate. 
At harvest you are proud and joyful. 
Which of us will be happier in the end? 
In allegory I have phrased this song of farming. 
Though proud and arrogant, be now gay and joyful. 
By making many offerings, accumulate 
Merits for your own good. 
The man countered, "Dear Yogi, I see you have a staff in your 
hand. What does it mean? Is it for amusement like a child's toy, or 
is it for lunatics to hold? Please tell me, what is it for?" Milarepa 
sang in answer: 
Listen, my dear, inquisitive patron! 
Do you know who I am? 
I am the Yogi, Milarepa, 
Who follows the ascetic way; 
I am a yogi, great in strength and perseverance, 
Who has no limitations. 
The staff in my hand 
Grew on a huge rock. 
It was cut by a sickle and became 
A companion of wild stags. 
It came from Nepal, in the South; 
From it I hung the Mahayana Siitras; 
I take it with me to the marketplace; 
It was offered to me by a faithful follower. 
This is the story of my walking-staff. 
If you do not understand my meaning, 
Listen then with great care: 

--- PAGE 212 ---
The stout end, cut from near the root, 
Symbolizes being "cut off" from Saqtsara. 
The thin end, cut from near the top, 
Symbolizes the "cutting off" of all doubts and 
confusions. 
It is two cubits3 long and represents 
The twin qualities of a Buddhist.4 
Of good quality and pliant, it is like 
The original Mind-Essence-good and sound. 
The varnish, of a pleasant brown, is like 
The great harmony of the "Original Mind Nature." 
Straight and supple, it symbolizes 
Unmistaken practice and devotion. 
The tiny grooves you see, represent 
The perfection of the Bodhi-Path, 
The four joints in the cane 
Are the Four Infinite Wishes,5 
The three knots symbolize 
The Three Bodies of the Buddha. 
It never changes color. This represents 
The immutable reality of the Root Principle.8 
Its head, curved and covered, displays 
The "beyond-playwords" nature of reality; 
Its white and glittering appearance shows 
The Dharmakaya-immaculate and pure. 
The hollows symbolize the void nature of all beings, 
The spots are a symbol of the sole Tig Le. 
The scattered black marks indicate 
That Tibetan yogis and Repas 
Have few disturbing thoughts. 
This cane most excellent represents 
My devotion and practice in compliance with the Dharma. 
Its elegance and loveliness displays 
My disciples' sincerity and faith. 
The iron ferrule on the tip conveys 
The perseverance of yogis in the hermitage. 

--- PAGE 213 ---
The Song of the Staff 
The handle, wrapped with copper, represents 
The mastery and attraction of I)akinis. 
The nail attached to the tip displays 
The bravery and diligence of yogis; 
The hanging brass ring represents 
The increase of inner merits. 
The ornament of Sha Bran [?] hanging down 
Is the flexible understanding of the yogi. 
The thong of two twisted ropes represents 
The entering of the Two-in-One Path; 
The Mother-and-Son thongs intermingling, 
The meeting with the Mother of the Three Bodies. 
The bone-ornaments hanging on the staff 
Mean many travels for the yogi. 
The flint and bellows signify 
That all he sees and meets 
Are the yogi's friends. 
The white shell hanging on the staff 
Means that I shall turn the Wheel of Dharma. 
The rag of leather symbolizes 
The yogi's attitude, without fear or shame. 
The mirror hanging on the staff 
Is the Enlightenment that shines within. 
The sharp knife indicates 
That the pain of passions will be cut. 
The stone-crystal symbolizes 
The purifying of defiled habitual thoughts. 
The ivory chain hanging on the staff 
Is the Chain-of-Regard between Guru and dis.ciple. 
The set of bells symbolizes 
My widespread reputation; 
The woolen cords of red and white, 
That my disciples will be numerous. 
The handsome staff that now I hold 
Is the means and symbol of the conquest over evil 
beings. 
--- PAGE 214 ---
Patron, you ask me for the meaning of this staff; 
This proves you have sincerity and faith. 
This present meeting witnesses 
Our pure wishes in a former life. 
For mankind and Devas, conceivers of all symbols, 
I have sung this "Song of the White Staff." 
Revere then and appreciate its Dharma teaching. 
Dear patron, I hope you practice Dharma and win 
happiness supreme. 
Great faith was engendered in the heart of this rich man. Bowing 
down at Milarepa's feet, he said, "Dear Lama, from now until the 
day of my death, I shall serve you. Please come and live permanently 
in my house." But the Jetsun and Sevan Repa would not promise 
to stay more than seven days, saying, "We have no wish to accept 
your worldly offerings." 
At the end of their sojourn, as they started to take leave, the 
patron cried: "Since you have made up your minds to depart, before 
you go, please tell us your Experiences and Realizations during meditation." In answer, the Jetsun and his disciple sang together: 
Listen to me, faithful patron, 
Who are rich but imprudent! 
Easy is it to talk of Dharma, 
But 'tis hard to practice it. 
Oh you confused and worldly beings, 
You always waste your leisure, letting time slip by. 
Though your mind is ever saying, "I must practice 
Dharma," 
Your life is wasted as the hours slip by. 
You should now determine to start practice: 
Cool mountain water 
Heals the bladder's ills, 
But only grouse and mountain birds can reach it; 
Beasts of the valley have no chance to drink it. 
The Sword of Heavenly Iron7 falling when it thunder~ 
Is the weapon with which to destroy the foe, 
But only the Elephant-Earth-Protector 
Can grasp and use it effectively; 

--- PAGE 215 ---
The Song of the Staff 
Small elephants have not the strength. 
The Nectar of Heaven is the essence of long life 
Ever keeping the quintessence of body strong, 
But only the Holy Guru, Nagarjuna, could use itNot all who practice Dharma. 
The golden chest, that gives enjoyment 
Is a treasure which cures poverty, 
But only "Prince Moonlight" can possess 'itNot the common people. 
The wondrous gem beneath the ocean 
Is a marvel granting all desires, 
But it belongs to the Dragon of Happiness; 
Men on the earth cannot obtain it. 
Grand scenery, indeed, has the Palace of Joyous 
Heaven, 
But only Guru Asailga can enjoy it; 
Not all human beings can reach or see it. 
The medicine of Six Merits 
Can cure colds and fever. 
'Tis made from Tsan Dan wood, 
And not from other trees. 
The Ten White Virtues from causation's law 
Enable one to roam the higher Realms, 
But only those with faith can practice themGreat sinners are not free. 
The Pith-Instructions of the 
Gurus 
Enable one to win highest Enlightenment, 
But only he with Karma can learn and practice them; 
Without capacity or Karma one seldom has the opporhmity. 
The precious Pith-Instruction of the Oral 
Succession 
Enables one, without fail, to become Buddha, 
But only determined men can follow it; 
Not pleasure-seekers, like yourself. 

--- PAGE 216 ---
Poverty is cured by food and wealth 
Which the generous and clever soon amass, 
But these the miserly can ne'er enjoy. 
Generosity is a merit of which one can be proud. 
You, the rich man of Ngan Tson, have it; 
But not all the wealthy are so generous. 
I, Milarepa, and the disciple Se Ston Repa,8 
Due to wishes made in former lives have stayed 
With you, the rich man of Jenlun Ngan Tson, 
For seven delightful days. No~ we must go. 
Health and long life to you and yours! 
Milarepa then said, "You offered me food and lodging, and I 
preached for you. This [relationship] is important. He who reveres 
and rejoices in the Dharma and has faith in it at all times, is planting the Seed-of-Dharma from which the Innate-born Wisdom will 
grow in his future lives. He who has rightly made a good wish, 
does not have to learn many teachings. Nor must he associate [with his 
Guru] for a long time. If the outer conditions and the inner seeds 
in one's own mind meet together, though temporarily one may go 
astray, the power of the seeds-of-the-wish will eventually bring one to 
the right path. Furthermore, faith and earnestness are most important. 
Nowadays, because people do not accumulate merits (by practicing 
virtuous deeds], they seldom see the inner merits of others, but only 
their outer faults, even though these faults are small and insignificant. 
If you have faith in me, whether I live near or far from you will 
make no difference. If we live too close and our relationship becomes 
too intimate, it will only cause discord and trouble between us. I 
think it would be too difficult for you, at the present time, to be 
a perfect practitioner of the Dharma. You must try to understand 
your own habitual-thinking. In any case, I shall make a good wish 
for you, and you should also try to pray to, and have faith in me. 
If you now practice virtuous deeds and put your faith (in the Dharmal, 
you will be reborn in a special, favorable country, with perfect conditions and means [to practice the Dharma]. It is not necessary for a 
real follower of Dharma to go to many places. Again, he who sees 
many faults in other people, is liable to be an ignorant person himself. To you worldly beings, your native land is always the best; also, 
you like grand religious ceremonies. But in fact, if you have goodwill and give provisions often and unsparingly to a single beggar, this 
would be quite sufficient. There is no such thing as 'this teaching is 

--- PAGE 217 ---
The Song of the Staff 
good' and 'that teaching is bad'; you should never be sectarian. It 
is hard for you to imitate me. The fox can never go where the lion 
leaps; he would break his back if he tried to copy the lion. It is 
indeed very difficult for most lovers of the Dharma to follow my way 
of practicing. I hope that you, the aristocrat, will never lose faith in 
Dharma." 
Having said this to the rich man, Milarepa and his disciple traveled 
on again for alms, [and soon] came to a town where they met a 
yogi who appeared to be, and was dressed like, a Tantra-follower. 
This Tantric yogi said to Milarcpa, "Dear Yogi, where have you come 
from? Judging by your appearance, it seems that you are a person 
having the Pure View, Pure Practice, and Equal Action.9 Have you 
anything to say which may help to further my progress?" Milarepa 
replied, "Do you have a real understanding of the View, Practice, 
and Action? If not, I may tell you about mine, but you might not 
quite appreciate it. It may be better this morning just to establish an 
auspicious and beneficial Karma-relationship between us." "Never 
mind," said the yogi, "I shall give you alms. I am a teacher of 
Tantrism myself, and so have some understanding of these things 
According to my School, the View, Practice, and Action are like this 
.... " And he expounded the teachings at length. Then he asked 
Milarepa; "Does your School agree with mine?" Milarepa replied, "He 
who does not fear SaJllsara, renounce the world, and follow the instruction of a qualified Guru, with a very strong desire to attain Buddhahood immediately- driven by his craving and evil instincts is liable 
to become a mere babbler. Although he talks a great deal about the 
View, Practice, and Action, he is most likely to go astray." And the 
Jetsun sang: 
Hearken, you great teacher! 
It is hard to help others 
H one does not renounce this world. 
If you do not realize SaJllsiira and Nirviii:Ja are one, 
And hold a faint idea but dimly in your mind, 
In indulgence you will freely gratify [your senses], 
And be carried away by the torrent of Eight 
Desires. 
[You should carefully observe and ask yourself): 
"Have I realized the truth of Two-in-One which 
is beyond extremes,10 
Or have I thrown myself over the Four Edges?11 

--- PAGE 218 ---
Is my practice free of 'mind effort'? 
Am I haunted by the ghost of 'form and substance'? 
Is my blissful and rapturous Samadhi 
A delusive state defiled by 'grasping-craving'? 
Have I been shackled by the laws of form 
\Vithout grace and blessing? 
vVhen I meditate on the identity of manifestation 
and Guru12 
Does my Awareness wander? 
When I illustrate the truth through Tantric symbols, 
Have I taught the Truth beyond all symbols? 
Have I polluted with 'intentional effort,' and distorted, 
The originally pure Self-mind? 
Have I done that which I willed 
In a way that righteous Lamas ne'er behave? 
Did I ever ask myself: 'Am I aware 
That wordly prosperity and achievements 
Are but the hindrances set up by devils?' " 
If you do not understand or practice 
The teaching of a Lineage with grace, 
The devils will mislead you with their art. 
Then you will never free yourself 
From the realms of misery and Sa111sara. 
Rely then on a genuine Lineage, and practice 
Your devotion without craving and self-indulgence. 
Having heard this song, the teacher turned to Milarepa in faith 
and reliance, crying, "This is indeed marvelous!" He bowed down at 
the feet of the Jetsun and invited him into his house, giving perfect 
offerings and service to him. He then asked Milarepa to accept him 
as his disciple. The Jetsun knew that he was a destined person, and 
granted his request. Thereupon, all three returned to Lashi Snow 
Mountain. Having received the Initiation and Pith-instructions from 
Milarepa, the teacher later acquired the Accomplishments and reached 
the state of Emancipation. He was destined eventually to become 
one of the heart-sons of Milarepa, and was known as Shangchub 
Jarbo-the Teacher of Ngan Tson. 
This is the story of Milarepa singing the "Song of the Staff" at 
Jen Valley, and of his meeting with the teacher of Ngan Tson. 

--- PAGE 219 ---
The Song of the Staff 
NOTES 
I Preparatory Practice (T.T.: 
s~on.hGro.): Before engaging in the main 
meditation practices such as the Arising Yoga, the Perfecting Yoga, and Mahamudra, the yogi should first complete all the preparatory practices. The four 
mo;t common ones are (I) 100,000 prostrations before the symbols of the Three 
Precious Ones; (2) I 00,000 prayers to one's Guru and Patron Buddha; (3) 
IOO,OOO prayers of penitence, together with IOO,OOO Mantras of Vajrasattva; and 
(4) offering IOO,OOO "Ma~~alas." 
2 Five Nectars: Five different secretions of the human body. 
3 Two Cubits or Two Troos: The Tibetan word "Troo" (T.T.: Khru) denotes 
a local unit of measure. Its length is from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger. 
4 Twin Qualities: probably the merits of Wisdom and of Compassion. 
5 Four Infinite Wishes: (1) that all sentient beings may sow the seeds of 
happiness and attain it; (2) that an sentient beings may avoid suffering and the 
cause of suffering; (3) that all sentient beings may attain "pure happiness"; (4) 
that all sentient beings may reach the state of tranquillity. Sec also Story 17, Note 25. 
6 Root Principle: See Story 12, Notes 5, 6, and 7.• 
7 Heavenly Iron (T.T.: gNam.ICags.): According to Tibetan legends, the 
weapons made of meteoric metal arc extremely strong and valuable. 
8 Probably a misprint for "Sevan Repa." 
9 Equal Action: Absorbed in the Realm of the "Equality of Saf!lsaraNirva~a," the enlightened being acts fearlessly and indifferently at all times. 
10 Lit.: "beyond the Four Edges." See Note 1I. 
11 The Four Edges or Four Ends (T.T.: mThah.bShi.), are the four basic 
patterns along which one settles his opinion on reality. They are that reality is (1) 
positive, or being; (2) negative, or non·bcing; (3) a combination of both being 
and non·being; or (4) a state beyond being and non·being. If one clings to any of 
these four "ends" or "extremes" he is said, according to Buddhism, to have missed 
the point. 
12 A Tantric yogi should know that all manifestations are representations of 
Absolute Truth, and that the "real Guru"- the embodiment of the Absolute- is 
his own mind. Thus, to meditate on one's own mind is to realize the identity of the 
manifestations and Gurus. 

--- PAGE 220 ---
THE TWENTY.,ONE 
EXHORTATIONS 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
NE night while meditating on Lashi Snow Mountain, Milarepa 
dreamt that a most beautiful young girl, adorned with jewels and 
bone ornaments, came to him and said, "Yogi Milarepa, you should follow your Guru's instruction, go to Di Se Snow Mountain and meditate 
there. On your way, you will meet a well-gifted and destined person 
· whom you should infh:ence and guide according to his need." After saying this she disappeared. When Milarepa awoke, he thought to himself, 
"This message is sent by the Patron Buddha and I)akini to enable me 
to repay my Guru's bounty. I must comply with her request and go at 
once." 
On his way from Lashi to Di Se Snow Mountain, he met an inhabitant of Nya Non called Dhamba Jhaupu. 
This man invited Milarepa to his house, made great offerings, and 
gave an elaborate feast in his honor. [At the feast], he said to the Jetsun, "For the sake of the disciples now assembled here, please be kind 
enough to preach for us the Dharma which blossoms within you. Please 
put this preaching into a song and sing it for us." 
And so Milarepa sang "The Twenty-One Exhortations for Mind": 
Great is the Skillful Path of Tantra 
And the Guru's Pith-Instruction, 
So, too, are perseverance and resolution; 
These are the "Three Greatnesses." 
Put the Life-active PraQa at the key point, 
The Mind-Essence in its Natural State, 
--- PAGE 221 ---
The Twenty-One Exhortations 
And consciousness under self-examination; 
These are the "Three Enterings." 
To fulfill the commandments of my Guru, 
Achieve the wishes of my heart, 
And be altruistic without effort; 
These are the "Three Accomplishments." 
Outer hindrances and demons disappear, 
Inner desires and passions are extinguished, 
Disorder and illness of body cease to be; 
These arc the "Three Absences." 
My skill and my resourcefulness in speech, 
My eloquence in answering all questions, 
My knowledge of the nature and aspects of Mind; 
These are the "Three Proficiencies." 
I see clearly that bliss is void of substance, 
I see all things manifest without discriminating, 
I see clearly That which is beyond all words; 
These are the "Three Sights." 
When men in crowds assemble, 
Means and enjoyments are gathered there 
And Oakinis congregate; 
These are the "Three Gatherings." 
These one-and-twenty Exhortations for the Mind 
Are fruit of my experience in meditation; 
All Dharma seekers should value them, 
Especially my followers and sons. 
Too much instruction hinders Liberation. 
Follow then and practice the precious words 
That I have sung to this assembly. 
Thereupon Dhamba Jhaupu served Milarepa, who gave him the Initiation and Key Instructions. Having practiced these teachings for some 
time he attained the Experiences and Realization, and later on became 
one of the "intimate sons" of the Jetsun. 
This is the story of Milarepa's meeting with Dhamba Jhaupu. 

--- PAGE 222 ---
MILAREPA'S MEETING WITH 
KAR CHON REPA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A s predicted in Marpa's prophecy, the Jetsun Milarepa set out for 
Di Se Snow Mountain with several of his disciples. When they 
reached Lowo Lake, one of the disciples pretended to be ill and would 
go no farther, so the journey was interrupted. Milarepa then stayed 
at the Upper Lowo that summer and preached the Dharma there. 
When the autumn came and Milarepa was about to go to Di Se Snow 
Mountain, the disciples and patrons gave him a farewell party. They all 
circled round and made offerings and obeisance to him. The patrons 
then besought him for instructions because they all realized that no one 
could tell when they would meet again. In response, Milarepa sang 
"The Right Yoga Practice": 
I, Milarepa, the man, the Yogi of Tibet, 
Have little learning, yet are my instructions great. 
I take little sleep, though persevering at my 
meditation, 
Humble am I in heart, but great is my persistence. 
Knowing one thing, I know all; 
Knowing all, I know that they are one. 
I am an expert in Absolute Truth. 
My bed is small, yet I am free to stretch my legs. 
My clothes are thin, yet is my body warm. 
I eat but little, yet am satisfied. 
I am the one whom all yogis venerate, 
--- PAGE 223 ---
Milarepa's Meeting with Kar Chon Repa 
To whom all faithful come, a guide 
On the dread path of life and death. 
Unattached to any home, 
I have no fixed dwelling; 
Disregarding all, I do my will. 
I crave for no possessions. Between clean 
And unclean food I do not discriminate. 
I suffer little pain from passion's sting. 
With little self-import1nce, I have few desires; 
I crave not for objective and subjective things; 
Thus can I untie NirviiQa's knots. 
I console old people when they grieve; 
Loving fun, to the young I am a friend. 
A yogi, I rove about all regions, wishing 
Devas and human beings to live in happiness. 
After hearing this song, they said to Milarepa, "To be sure, Revered 
One, this is your life and practice; but please tell us what we should 
do. Be kind enough to give us, your disciples, some instructions and 
advice." The Jetsun then emphasized the transiency of all beings, admonishing them to practice Dharma earnestly. And he sang "The Song 
of Transience with Eight Similes": 
Faithful disciples here assembled [ask yourselves]: 
"Have I practiced Dharma with great earnestness? 
Has the deepest faith arisen in my heart?" 
He who wants to practice Dharma and gain non-regressive 
faith, 
Should listen to this explanation of the Mundane 
Truths 
And ponder well their meaning. 
Listen to these parables and metaphors: 
A painting in gold, 
Flowers of turquoise blue, 
Floods in the vale above, 
Rice in the vale below, 
Abundance of silk, 
A jewel of value, 
The crescent moon, 

--- PAGE 224 ---
TilE IIUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
And a precious sonThese are the eight similes. 
No one has sung before 
Such casual words [on this]. 
No one can understand their meaning 
If he heeds not the whole song. 
The gold painting fades when it is completedThis shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of all things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 
The lovely flowers of turquoise-blue 
Are destroyed in time by frostThis shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of alJ things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 
The flood sweeps strongly down the vale above, 
Soon becoming weak and tame in the plain belowThis shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of all things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 
Rice grows in the vale below; 
Soon with a sickle it is reapedThis shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of all things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 
Elegant silken cloth 
Soon with a knife is cutThis shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of all things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 
The precious jewel that you cherish 
Soon will belong to othersThis shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of all things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 

--- PAGE 225 ---
Milarepa's Meeting with Kar Chon Repa 
The pale moon beams 
Soon will fade and vanishThis shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of all things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 
A precious son is born; 
Soon he is lost and gone -
This shows the illusory nature of all beings, 
This proves the transient nature of all things. 
Think, then, you will practice Dharma. 
These are the eight similes I sing. 
I hope you will remember and practice them. 
Affairs and business will drag on forever, 
So lay them down and practice now the Dharma. 
If you think tomorrow is the time to practice, 
Suddenly you find that life has slipped away. 
Who can tell when death will come? 
Ever think of this. Devote 
Yourselves to Dharma practice. 
Hearing this song, all the patrons fell prostrate before Milarepa in 
their deep faith. Feeling a strong conviction of the truth contained in 
his admonishments, tears gushed from their eyes like the waters of n 
spring. Three young men among them asked Milarepa to take them as 
his disciple-servants. Thereupon, the Jetsun sang of "The Ten Difficulties": 
If a Buddhist be without benevolence, 
How can he subdue and convert evil people? 
If spiritual longing be not awakened, 
How can the merits grow within one? 
If a "great yogi" has no perseverance, 
How can the Experiences and Realization come? 
If a monk keeps not the priestly rules, 
How can he receive gifts, service, or respect? 
If a Tantric yogi violates the Precepts of Samaya, 
How can he gain powers or grace? 
· 

--- PAGE 226 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
If a patron be mean and parsimonious, 
He can never be of pood repute. 
If a yogi jokes and talks of nonsense, 
He will never be respected. 
He who pays no heed to Karma or to virtue, 
Will never understand the truth of Voidness. 
If a trusted Lama grows tired of religion, 
He finds it hard to readjust to life. 
Though faith arises now within you, happy young men, 
Self-control will still be hard. Though now you feel 
Pressing and urgent need to practice Dharma, 
If you go too far, my sons, 
Later you will be regretful. 
Let us now wish that we meet againThe power of Karma will bring this to pass. 
Till we meet once more, will I, the Yogi, 
By my own words steadfastly abide. 
All happiness and good fortune, 
I wish for you, dear patrons, 
Health and freedom from all sickness, 
A long life free from injuries, 
And may sons and fathers meet again. 
I, the Yogi, will wander where I please. 
You, young men, so spoiled and happy, 
Return now to your homes. 
Upon hearing this song, they all surrounded the Jetsun, grasped his 
clothing, and embraced his body, weeping, bowing down at his feet, 
and making their wishes. 
Among them there was a young man who was extremely sincere. He 
pleaded again and again with Milarepa in great earnestness; eventually 
the Jetsun relented and accepted him as a disciple. He then brought the 
young man back to De Si Snow Mountain, where he gave him the Initiation and Instructions. Later, this young man attained emancipation 
and became known as Kar Chon Repa, one of Milarepa's "intimate 
sons." 
This is the story of Milarepa's meeting with Kar Chon Repa. 

--- PAGE 227 ---
ADMONISHMENTS TO 
DHARMA WONSHU 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O NCE in the early part of the last month of autumn, Milarepa and 
his disciples went to Bushen Chitang for alms. Many people were 
gathered there. Milarepa said to them, "Patrons, please give me the 
alms for which I have come." Now among them was a young, welldressed girl, who said, "Dear Yogi, who are you? Who are your father and mother, your brother and sister?" Whereupon, the Jetsun 
sang: 
I bow down to all Holy Gurus! 
Pray grant me your grace and blessings! 
My father is Gungtuzunpo,l the All-Perfect One; 
My mother, Drowazunpo, the Worthy-Woman. 
My brother is called King-of-Knowledge, 
My aunt, Lamp-of-Illumination, 
And my sister, Dazzling-Faith. 
My friend is called Natural-Wisdom, 
And my child, Son-of-Illumination. 
My book is Foundation-of-the-Universe-and-Manifestation, 
My horse, Mount-of-Consciousness-PraQa, 
And my patrons are the Four-Regions-of-Weu-and-Tsang,2 
As for me, I am a small white Buddha Stiipa. 
I have never practiced singing, 
Yet will I sing clearly for you: 
My father, the All-Perfect One, 
Earns the wages of Knowledge and Practice; 
--- PAGE 228 ---
Never do worldly thoughts arise in him. 
My mother, Worthy-Woman, always feeds me 
The milk of Pith-Instruction from her breast. 
Imbibing the Practice-Teachings, I have ne'er felt 
hungry. 
My brother, King-of-Knowledge, holds within his hand 
The knife of Skill-and-Wisdom,3 
And with it kills wrong views both coarse and fine. 
My aunt, Lamp-of-Illumination, displays her Mirror 
of Self-Mind 
Unsullied by the rust of habitual-thought. 
My sister, Dazzling-Faith, 
Has long been free from meanness. 
In her practice of devotion, 
She has goods but does not hold them;. 
What she has, she never hoards. 
I and my comrade, Natural-Wisdom, 
Like one man live together 
And never raise our voice in strife. 
My only child, Son-of-Illumination, 
Is heir and holder of the Buddha's Line; 
I have never raised a child 
Who needed washing or change of diapers. 
My book, Foundation-of-Universe-and-Manifestation, 
Illustrates for me the Principles and Meanings; 
Never have I read books with printed words. 
My horse, Mount-of-Consciousness-Pral)a, 
Carries me swiftly where e'er I want to go. 
I never need a horse of flesh and blood. 
My patrons in the Four Regions of Weu and Tsang, 
Offer me provisions when I ask for them. 
I never weigh or press my bag of flour. 
When I offer, it is to the Precious Ones; 
When I rely, it is upon my own Guru. 
I say that I am white, because I practice deeds of 
whiteness. 
I say that I am small, for few are my desires. 

--- PAGE 229 ---
Admonishments to Dharma W onshu 
Z09 
Therefore, I say that I'm a Stiipa, small and white. 
"These sayings are indeed very wonderful," remarked the girl. "But 
do you also have any Samsaric companions, sons, and belongings?" 
Milarepa then sang in reply: 
At first my experiences in Sarpsara 
Seemed most pleasant and delightful; 
Later, I learned about its lessons; 
In the end, I found a Devil's Prison. 
These are my thoughts and feelings on Sarpsara. 
So I made my mind up to renounce it. 
At first, one's friend is like a smiling angel; 
Later, she turns into a fierce, exasperated woman; 
But in the end a demoness is she. 
These are my thoughts and feelings on companions. 
So I made my mind up to renounce a friend. 
At first, the sweet boy smiles, a Babe of Heaven; 
Later, he makes trouble with the neighbors; 
In the end, he is my creditor and foe. 
These are my thoughts and feelings about children. 
So I renounced both sons and nephews. 
At first, money is like the Wish-fulfilling Gem; 
Later, one cannot do without it; 
In the end, one feels a pennyless beggar. 
These are my thoughts and feelings about money. 
So I renounced both wealth and goods. 
When I think of these experiences, 
I cannot help but practice Dharma; 
When I think of Dharma, 
I eannot help but offer it to others. 
When death approaches, 
I shall then have no regret. 
Hearing the Jetsun's song, the light of faith was aroused in the girl. 
She invited Milarepa and his disciples to her house, and gave them perfect service and offerings. She was then given the Instruction, and entered the Path. 

--- PAGE 230 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONCS OF MILABEPA 
Milarepa and his disciples then went together to Dre Tze Snow 
Mountain. One day, many patrons came to visit him. Among them 
there was a well-gifted, aristocratic young man- a descendant of the 
Jowo family, who had the greatest faith in Milarepa. He said "Dear 
Lama, all your doings are inconceivably marvelous! Please grant us a 
teaching which we can always practice." 
In response to his request, Milarepa sang: 
Listen, all you faithful patrons. 
When you walk, identify your perceptions with MindEssence;t 
This is self-liberation when you walk. 
When you sit, relax and be at ease; 
This is the Heart-Teaching of how to sit. 
When you sleep, sleep in the Realm of Equality; 
This is the way to sleep in the Great Light. 
When you eat, eat in the Realm of Voidness; 
This is the way to eat without dichotomy. 
When you drink, drink the water of Skill and Wisdom; 
This is the way to drink without cessation. 
When you walk, sit, or sleep, always look at your mind; 
This is a worthy practice without pause or interruption. 
"We are incompetent people and do not know how to practice this 
profound teaching," exclaimed the patrons, "Oh, those who know how 
to do so are fortunate indeed!" Milarepa replied, "When you say you 
do not know how to practice this teaching, that only means you want 
to shun it; this is also the very sign of incapability for devotion. If you 
determine to practice it, you will know how to do it and really understand it. Now. listen to the profit of this teaching in my song": 
My gifted patrons, in the transient, 
Flask-like human body dwells 
An innate-born Buddha Kaya.5 
If one can display the lamp of Great Light, 
The outer and inner Dharmakaya will shine brightly! 
In the SaiJlsiiric house of Complex-Thought 

--- PAGE 231 ---
Admonishments to Dharma W onshu 
Dwells a baby eagle-the Bodhi-Mind, 
If once she flaps her wings of Wisdom-Skill, 
Surely she will fly up to the Sky of All-Knowing! 
In the Victorious Snow Mountain of Self-Body 
Dwells a baby lion of consciousness. 
He who can practice [Dharma] without clinging 
To the Six-Conscio:.~snesses-Group, 
Surely will conquer both SaiJlsara and Nirvat:~a! 
On the blind ocean of SaiJlsara float 
The seagoing merchants of the Six Realms. 
He who never parts from the Trikaya,S 
Surely will conquer the raging seas! 
In the illusive house of the Five Poisons 
Dwells a group of bandits to prevent one's liberation. 
He who can hold secure the Rope of Skill, will 
Surely overcome these dreadful outlaws. 
The Absolute Body, Dharmakaya, is like the firmament; 
The Wish-fulfilling Gem may there be found. 
He who can meditate on it without distraction, 
Surely will attain the Trikaya of Buddhahood. 
In the cities of the Three Kingdoms of SaiJlsara 
Lie the iron chains that bind us in the Six Realms. 
He who can untie them through the Guru's teachings, 
Surely will tread the Path of Liberation. 
From the gem-like, precious Guru 
Springs the fountain of the Pith-Instruction. 
He who quaffs it with unshaken faith 
Surely will be freed from sinful thirsting. 
Thus he sang; and the patrons were all confirmed in their belief, and 
departed. But the young aristocrat determined to devote himself to the 
pursuit of Dharma, thinking: "One day I must come to this Lama and 
offer myself as his servant-disciple." Meanwhile, the Jetsun and his disciples decided to remain at that place, enjoying the offerings and services 
from both human and non-human beings. They worked on furthering 
their patron's progress until the end of spring. 
When they were about to return to Di Se Snow Mountain, the patron 

--- PAGE 232 ---
gave them a grand festival. Arising from the assembly, the young aristocrat, who had the utmost faith toward Milarepa, said, "Dear Lama, I 
have heard that you, the Dharma practitioner, have the teaching called 
the 'View, Practice, Action, and Fruit.' Would you please be kind 
enough to tell us your own experience of them?" 
In answer, Milarepa sang: 
Because I see the self-face of the View, 
The thought of contrast by itself dissolves; 
How then can I have the Idea-of-Twothe self and others? 
The View is void of limit and discrimination. 
When in the Practice I become absorbed, 
Good and evil are reduced to self-liberation; 
How then can I have the Idea-of-Twohappiness and suffering? 
The Practice is devoid of limitary feelings and 
experience. 
When I adhere to the self-continuance of Action, 
Dislike is reduced to self-liberation; 
How then can I have the Impulse-of-Twocraving and aversion? 
The Action is free from limitary attachment. 
Since self-liberation is the Fruit, 
Both Nirval)a and Sa111sara are reduced to it. 
How then can I have the Idea-of-Twogetting and abandoning? 
Absence of fear and hope is 
The Fruit of this great Practice. 
The young aristocrat then said to Milarepa, "Dear Lama, I have 
made up my mind to devote myself to the practice of Dharma. But 
I do not dare to start without the permission of my parents and relatives. Although I will have to ask their permission first, please be kind 
enough to accept me as your disciple-servant and take me with you." 
Milarepa replied, "He who wants to practice the Dharma, should think 
of the miseries of Sa111sara. Then, if he still cannot make up his mind 
and, instead, looks for permission or recommendation from others, he 
will never succeed. Listen to my song": 

--- PAGE 233 ---
Admonishments to Dharma W onshu 
If a pious person, who wants to practice Dharma, 
Cannot cut off the tie of influence, 
How can he break through others' domination? 
If one cannot live on the alms of Non-attachment, 
How can he free himself from the bonds of 
honor and pride? 
If, knowing the transiency of all being, 
He has no sense of contentment, 
How can he be content with his amassed wealth? 
How can one understand the truth beyond words, 
By talking and discussing without first-hand 
experience? 
How can he who does not realize 
The truth beyond all symbols, 
Describe It with a darkened mind? 
How can he who shuns not the evils of bad partnership 
Avoid the painful consequences? 
If one cannot utilize this suffering 
To further his spiritual growth, 
How can he overcome all griefs and blind striving? 
If one knows not that disturbing thoughts themselves 
are Dharmakaya, 
How can he reduce them 
By corrective measures? 
If one renounces not all concerns and undertakings, 
How in moderation can he practice his devotion? 
How can he who does not resign from all activities 
And cut off all attachments, achieve success 
In Dharma by doing this and that, or by mere thinking? 
How can he who renounces not all ties, 
Practice meditation without worldly thoughts in mind? 
If he does not renounce at once, 
How can he hope to do so later? 
--- PAGE 234 ---
If he thinks he need not strive for improvement now, 
But can do so later, he must fail. 
If he does not strengthen now his will, 
Success from hope and expectation will not spring. 
Upon hearing Milarepa's song, the young aristocrat was deeply moved 
and convinced of the truth contained in it. He decided at once to practice the Dharma, and his parents also gave their permission. After serving his apprenticeship with Milarepa, he was given the Initiation and 
Pith-Instructions, and eventually attained success and Liberation. He 
was known as Ngogom Rcpa Dharma Wonshu Shawa, one of the "close 
sons" of Milarepa. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting his disciple Repa Dharma Wonshu at Bu Shen. 
NOTES 
I Gungtuzunpo (T.T.: Kun.Du.bZaft.Po.; Skt.: Samantabhadra): The "Adi 
Buddha," or "Primordial Buddha," which, according to most Tibetan scholars, is 
a symbolic name to denote the Primordial Buddha-nature within all sentient beings, 
but not a name to denote a person or deity whose existence is prior to all beings. 
2 Weu and Tsang: Central and Southwestern Tibet. 
3 Skillfulness and Wisdom (T.T.: Thabs.Daii.<;es.Rab.; Skt.: Upaya [and] 
Prajtiii): Upaya means the skillful or ingenious methods and conduct with which a 
Bodhisattva applies his altruistic deeds to benefit sentinent beings. Prajiia means the 
transcendental Wisdom shared only by enlightened beings. Upaya in its most general 
application denotes the first five Paramitas, i.e., Charity, Discipline, Patience, Diligence, and Meditation; Prajiia denotes the last Paramita, i.e., the Prajtiaparamita, 
the Perfection of Wisdom. 
4 Lit.: "Bring all manifestation to the Path." 
5 Kaya: meaning Body. 
6 Trikaya: the three Bodies of Buddha, i.e., the Body of Truth (Dharmakiiya); the Body of Divinity or Reward (Sambhogakaya); and the Body of Manifestation (Nirmat:~akaya). 

--- PAGE 235 ---
THE MIRACLE CONTEST 
ON DI SE SNOW MOUNTAIN 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
0 NCE when the Jetsun with many of his disciples were on their way 
to Di Se Snow Mountain from Bu Shen, the local deities of Di Se 
and Ma Pam came out with a great retinue to welcome them. They 
bowed down to Milarepa, and made offerings to him on a grand 
scale. They welcomed him sincerely and pointed out the local meditation hermitages, all of which were places distinguished in history and 
legend. They also swore to protect his followers, and then returned 
to their own abodes. 
When Milarepa and his disciples reached the banks of Lake Ma Pam, 
there came a Bon1 Priest called Naro Bhun Chon. This man, having 
heard a great deal about Milarepa, and having learned that he was 
coming to Di Se, went with his brothers and sisters to Lake Ma Pam 
to meet the Jetsun and his disciples. Pretending that he did not know 
who they were, the Bon priest asked, "From whence have you come 
and where might you be going?" Milarepa replied, "We are going to Di 
Se Snow Mountain to practice meditation. Our destination is a hermitage there." Tbe priest then asked, "\Vho are you, and what is your 
name?" 
"My name is Milarepa." 
"Oh, in that case," replied the priest, "you are just like Ma Pam-it 
has a great reputation in far-away places, but when one reaches it one 
finds it not really so wonderful as reputed. Perhaps the lake is quite 
marvelous, but it and the encircling mountains nearby are all dominated 
by us, followers of Bon. If you want to stay here, you must follow our 
teachings and sow your seeds [in Bon]." 
Milarepa replied, "Generally speaking, this mountain was prophesied 
by Buddha Himself to be a place of the Doctrine-holders. For me, in 
--- PAGE 236 ---
particular, it has great significance, for it was spoken of by my Guru 
Marpa. You Bonists, who have been staying here so far, are indeed 
very fortunate! If you want to remain here in future, you should follow the teachings of my religion; otherwise, you had better go elsewhere." 
"It seems to me that you have a dual personality," said the Bon priest. 
"From a far distance I heard that you were indeed great; but when one 
comes close to you, you look small and insignificant. If you are really 
the remarkable person that people say, you should not mind having :1 
contest with me. We will see whose miraculous powers are superior. 
The one who wins shall remain here and be considered as the legitimate 
owner of the place, and the one who loses shall leave." Saying this, the 
priest straddled the Ma Pam lake and sang: 
The Di Se Snow Mountain [of the Himalayas] is 
most famous, 
But its summit is covered deep in snow! 
The lake of Ma Pam is indeed well-known, 
But the power of water breaks through it! 
Milarepa's reputation is indeed most great, 
Yet he is an old eccentric who sleeps naked. 
From his mouth he chants melodious songs, 
But he holds in his hands a metal staff.2 
There is nothing great about him! 
In our Bon religion, 
The Immutable One is the Swastika-Body3 -
The Lord Ye Shin Dsu Pud, and other heavenly beings. 
The fierce blood-drinking Deity with gaping mouth 
Has nine heads, eighteen arms, and many miraculous 
powers. 
Yes, His Transformation Body has nine heads! 
His sister is the World-Conquering Mother. 
I, the Bon novice, am her disciple. 
Look at me! See how I demonstrate miraculous power! 
In reply, Milarepa seated himself above the lake and, without his 
body growing any bigger or the lake any smaller, he appeared to cover 
it all. He sang: 

--- PAGE 237 ---
The Miracle Contest on Di Se Snow Mountain 
Listen to me, you heavenly and human beings here 
assembled. 
On the summit of the Eagle Mountain 
Upon the Seat of Eight Non-Fears4 
Sits the Victorious One, Buddha Sakyamuni. 
In the Dharma Palace of the Heaven of Og Men5 
Abides the Sixth Buddha, Great Dorje-Chang, the 
Wisdom Body of Not-Two. 
The great Mother, the Goddess, is Dagmema; 
The Transformation Body of the Inborn is the great 
Tilopa; 
The Teacher, the Door-Protector,6 is the great Naropa; 
The Buddha-like Translator is the great Marpa. 
From these four Deities, I receive grace and blessings. 
I, Milarepa, the renowned and celebrated one, 
Following the order of my Guru, Marpa, 
For the welfare of all men 
Meditate on Di Se Snow Mountain. 
To you, the wrong-view-holder Bonist, 
I now give answer with this song: 
The famous Di Se Mountain blanketed with snow 
Symbolizes the pure, white Buddhist doctrine. 
The streams flowing into the famous Blue Lake of 
MaPam 
Symbolize one's deliverance to the Realm of 
the Absolute. 
I, the famous Milarepa, the old man who sleeps naked, 
Am he who now transcends the dualistic realm! 
The little songs springing from my mouth 
Are but the natural outflow of my heart; 
They tell of, and describe the Sutras of the Buddha. 
The staff held in my hand 
Symbolizes the crossing of the ocean of Saq1sara. 
I have mastered both the mind and forms; 

--- PAGE 238 ---
Unaided by worldly deities 
I can perform all miracles. 
Di Se, where dwell worldly Devas with crude bodies,7 
Is the king of all snow mountains on this earth. 
This place belongs to Buddhists, 
To the followers of Milarepa. 
If you, Bon priests and heretics, will now practice 
the Dharma, 
You, too, will soon be able to benefit all; 
If not, you should depart and go elsewhere, 
Because my powers of magic are greater far than yours. 
Watch closely now and see what I can dol 
At this, Milarepa performed another miracle by putting the whole 
Ma Pam Lake on his finger-tip, without doing the slightest harm to the 
living beings in it. The Bon priest said, "In this first contest, your miracle was better than mine. But I carne here first. We must have another 
contest to see which of us is lhe more powerful." Milarepa replied, "I 
shall not emulate you, the magician who smears drugs on his body in 
order to deceive others by conjuring up delusive visions. I will not enter 
into any contest with such a person. If you do not wish to follow the 
teachings of the Buddha, you may go elsewhere." The Bon priest countered, "I will not renounce the teaching of the Swastica-Bon. If you 
win the contest, I will give up and go away. Otherwise, I will never 
leave here. According to the Buddhist precepts, you may not kill or 
harm me. Is this not so? Now let us fight with our supernatural powers." 
Thereupon, the Bon priest started to circle Di Se Snow Mountain 
from right to left, while Milarepa and his followers circled it clockwise. 
They met on a big rock in the northeastern valley of Di Se. The Bonist said to Milarepa, "It is very good that you [pay homage to this holy 
place] by circumambulating it. Now, yoti should follow the Bon way 
of circling the mountain." Saying this, he took Milarepa by the hand 
and dragged him in his direction. The Jctsun retorted, "I will not follow 
your wrong path and reverse the Buddhist tradition. I think it better 
that you follow me and adopt the Buddhist way of making the circle." 
Saying this, Milarepa in turn grabbed the Bon priest's hand and dragged 
him in his direction. Pulling each other back and forth on the rock, 
both the Jetsun and the Bon priest left many of their footprints there. 
But because the power of Milarepa was much greater than that of the 
priest, he was forced to follow l\1ilarepa's direction. 
When they reached the north side of Di Se, the priest said, "Later, 

--- PAGE 239 ---
The Miracle Contest on Di Se Snow Mountain 
we should follow the Bon way, go in the opposite direction, and make 
another circle." "Well, that will depend on how great your power is," 
replied Milarepa. The priest then said, "It seems that your power is 
greater than mine this time. But we should still try our strength fur-
.ther." Saying this, he lifted up a huge rock, as big as a yak, in front 
of the hill. Then Milarepa came forward and lifted up the priest as well 
as the rock. The priest then said, "This time you win again. But to win 
once or twice means nothing. We should continue our contest." Milarepa replied, "The stars may try to emulate the light of the moon and 
sun, but the darkness covering the Four Continents will be dispelled 
only by the sun and moon. You may try to emulate me, but you 
can never match me. Now, Di Se Mountain belongs to me. It was to 
please you that I revealed my miraculous power. Everyone can now 
see that the Buddhist practice is superior." 
Thereupon, the Jetsun sat in the Lotus Cave on the western side of 
Castle Valley, while the Bon priest sat in a cave on the eastern side. 
Milarepa stretched his leg from the west side of the valley and reached 
right in front of the cave where the priest was sitting. He then called, 
"Now, you do the same thing!" The priest also stretched out his leg, 
but it did not even reach the brook! Whereupon, the Non-men spectators in the sky all laughed heartily at him. 
Although the priest was now a little ashamed and embarrassed, he 
cried out, "I still want to fight on!" Saying this, he again started circling 
the mountain in the Bon way. The Jetsun also resumed the circling in 
the Buddhist way. This time they met on the south side of Di Se. When 
it began to rain, Milarepa said, "We need a shelter to protect us. Let us 
now build a house. Would you like to lay the foundation stone and floor, 
or do you prefer to put on the roof?" The priest said, "I prefer to put 
on the roof. You do the foundation work." Milarepa agreed. Then he 
pointed to a rock as big as three persons standing up together, and said, 
"Let us go over there." When they reached it, the Jetsun began to lay 
the foundation. He saw that the Bon priest had split a giant rock, as big 
as the body of an eight-year-old child. Whereupon, Milarepa made a sign, 
a mudra of Conquering, and the rock held by the priest split down the 
middle and broke in half. Milarepa then said, "Now, you can bring the 
roof here." "But you have already broken it!" cried the priest. "Well, it 
was because of our contest of miracle-working that I did it," replied 
Milarepa, "but this time I shall let you prepare another rock and will 
not repeat the gesture of breaking. This time you may bring me the prepared rock." Accordingly, the priest split another rock and was about to 
lift it up, when Milarepa immediately made a gesture of pressing-down. 
The priest was surprised, as he tried to lift the rock,to find that it had 
become extremely heavy. So he stopped trying and made an excuse, 

--- PAGE 240 ---
saying, "I have already prepared the rock-roof. Now it is your turn to 
carry it to the other side." Milarepa replied, "My job is to lay the foundation; yours is to put on the roof. Now try to lift it up and bring it 
here." So the Bon priest tried again. He used all his strength, struggling 
with distended eyes to lift the rock, but he could not move it an inch. 
Seeing this, Milarepa said, "I am a yogi who has attained both the Common and Ultimate Accomplishments. My miraculous powers are different from yours. Though you have achieved the miraculous power of the 
Common Accomplishment, it can never emulate mine. If I make another subduing-gesture, you will not even be able to split the rock any 
more. The reason that I did not do so in the beginning was simply because I wanted to amuse the spectators. Now look at me and see how I 
lift it up!" So saying, Milarepa merely used one hand to pick up the 
giant rock and put it on his shoulder. Thereby, his handprint was found 
impressed in the rock. Then he stood on it and left his footprints. Finally he put the rock on his head and left his headprint and [more] handprints upon it. Later on, this cave was called the Cave of Miracle-Working and became very famous. It was then that the Bon priest admitted 
his defeat. 
The Jetsun had many other contests with Naro Bhun Chon. His performances were far superior to, and much more wonderful, than the 
priest's. Finally, Naro Bhun Chon said, "You said that I am a magician; 
but from what I can see, you are the magician. I am not convinced by 
your miracle-working. Now, on the fifteen of this month, we shall have 
a race to see who can first reach the summit of Di Se Mountain. The 
winner will be recognized as the host of the mountain. This will also 
decide, beyond dispute, the one who has really attained the Ultimate 
Accomplishment." "Very well," replied Milarepa, "we will do as you 
wish. But what a pity that you Bon priests think your little bit of mystical 
inner experience is the Ultimate Accomplishment! To attain the Ultimate Accomplishment one has to behold the nature of his own mind. 
If one wants to realize this, he should follow and meditate on the teachings of my School -
the Practice Succession." The Bon priest replied; 
"What difference is there between your mind and mine? Is yours good 
and mine bad? What difference is there between Bonism and Buddhism? 
Although your practice and mine are alike, you may be more proficient 
in the art of delusive magic. Therefore, so far, it looks as if you are superior. Anway, the race to Di Se will settle everything once and for all." 
Milarepa replied, "All right! Very good! That will settle everything." 
Whereupon, Naro Bhun Chon concentrated his mind to pray to his 
god diligently and undistractedly, while Milarepa just carried on naturally. When it came to the fifteenth day, in the very early morning, Naro 
Bhun Chon, wearing a green cloak and playing a Bon musical instru-

--- PAGE 241 ---
The Miracle Contest on Di Se Snow Mountain 
ment, fle\v through the sky on a drum towards Di Se. Milarepa's disciples all saw this, but Milarepa was still sound asleep. Thereupon, Rechungpa called out: "Dear Jetsun, wake up! Look! Though it is still so 
early in the morning, Naro Bhun Chon is flying on a drum to Di Se! He 
has reached the waist of the mountain now!" 
The Jetsun still lay there as if nothing had happened, and finally said 
slowly, "Has our Bon friend arrived there already?" Then all the disciples pressed Milarepa to take immediate action. He said, "Very well. 
Look!", and he made a gesture toward the Bon priest. When the disciples looked at the priest again, they found that despite all his efforts 
to mount higher, he could only circle round and round the mountain. 
When the day broke, and the sun appeared, Milarepa snapped his 
fingers, donned a cloak for wings, and flew over toward Di Se. In a second he arrived at the summit of the mountain, reaching it just at the 
time when the sunlight also shone upon it. There the Jetsun beheld the 
Gurus of the Transmission, and the tutelary deities. Buddha Dem Chog 
and his retinues all appeared, rejoicing before him. Although he knew 
that in essence all arc equal- that the nature of Equality is imbued in 
all- Milarepa was nevertheless very pleased at his victory. 
Meanwhile Naro Bhun Chon had reached the neck of the mountain. 
When he saw the Jetsun, lofty and compassionate, sitting at ease on the 
summit, he was dumbfounded and fell down from the heights, his riding-drum rolling down the southern slope of Di Se. As his pride and 
arrogance were now utterly subdued, he humbly cried to Milarepa, 
"Your power and miracle-working are indeed superior to mine! Now 
you are the master of Di Se. I will leave, but go to a place from where 
I can still see Di Se Snow Mountain." 
Milarepa then said, "Although you are blessed by the worldly gods 
and have attained a smattering of Common Accomplishment, I, on the 
other hand, am a person who has fully realized the Innate Wisdom and 
attained the Ultimate Accomplishment. How can you possibly emulate 
me? The summit of Di Se Snow 1\Iountain is the Mystic Vajra garden 
wherein the \Visdom Buddha, Korlo Dompa [Sa111vara l, dwells. You 
have no merit to reach there. For the sake of the Buddhists who are 
assembled here, I asked permission of the deities, and showed it to all. 
Because I wanted to suppress your pride, I made you fall down from 
the mountain and lose your drum. From now on, even if you want to 
reach the foot of Di Se, you will have to rely on my power to get there. 
I will now tell you why I possess such power: 
I bow down to my Guru, the gracious Marpa! 
Through His mercy and the compassion of all Buddhas 

--- PAGE 242 ---
I heard the wondrous Lord Buddha Sakyamuni, 
He who subdued the heretics and followers of the 
Six Schools8 
With the rightful teaching of Dharma. 
The doctrine of Buddhism has thus been spread over 
the world. 
On the Mountain, the Snow Di Se, 
I, the Yogi of Tibet, with the Dharma conquer Bon, 
And make the Buddha's Practice Lineage illuminate 
Tibet. 
My miraculous powers come from superstrength, 
Which I have many reasons to possess: 
Belonging to a Lineage with great blessing and grace 
Is one of the sources of this strength. 
The primordial Buddha, Dorje-Chang, is a strength; 
The compassionate Guru, the Master of all PithInstructions, is another; 
From the Translator Marpa comes a third. 
The Mind-Beyond, with its boundless knowledge, is a 
strength; 
The Originally Pure9 is another; 
So is the unwavering meditation practice of 
Non-discrimination, 
And so also is the Great Light. 
If, when relaxed completely, 10 one observes what 
happens, 
This very act in itself produces strength. 
The All-flowing, All-abundant, and All-embracing, 
And the self-face of the Being-Nature all bring 
strength. 
The self-liberation of all forms is a strength. 
If one follows the orders of his Guru, 
The observation of precepts becomes a 
strength. 

--- PAGE 243 ---
The Miracle Contest on Di Se Snow Mountain 
To be without sinful deeds and transgression is a 
strength. 
If one can meditate in all one does, 
This very practice will bring strength. 
When all manifestations become your friends,ll 
A Great Strength will emerge; 
Strong perseverance and determination do the same. 
This is my strength, the strength of Milarepa. 
With it have I now conquered heretics. 
Hereafter I shall be the master of Di Se Snow Mountain, 
Whence I shall propagate the Buddha's teachings. 
To you, oh Wisdom-Deities, I give worship, and pray. 
So went his song. "I am now fully convinced of your miraculous 
strength and powers." said the Bon priest, "They are indeed superior 
and marvelous. I sincerely beg you to allow me to stay where I can 
still see Di Se Snow Mountain." Milarepa replied, "In that case, you 
might live on the mountain over there." Saying which, he grasped a 
handful of snow and threw it to the top of a mountain to the east. 
Since that time a lump of snow has always been seen on the top of 
that mountain. Then, by Milarepa's power, both he and the Bon priest 
came to the neck of Di Se. The priest said: "In future I would like 
to circumambulate Di Se to pay my homage, but I will need a place 
to stay during my pilgrimage." "You may stop over there- the mountain opposite Di Se," replied the Jetsun. Afterwards, the Bonists built 
a sti.ipa in a cave there, and used it as a dwelling place during their 
pilgrimages to Di Se. Thus the followers in Milarepa's Lineage controlled all the region of the three lakes in the snow mountains. 
This is the story of how Milarepa subdued Naro Bhun Chon at Di 
Se Snow Mountain. 
NOTES 
1 The aboriginal religion of Tibet. 
Z Milarepa's staff was made of cane, but certain parts were probably covered by metal. 
3 Swastika-Body; Swastica-Bon: The Swastika sign is a holy symbol of the Bon 
religion. 

--- PAGE 244 ---
4 The Seat of Eight Non-Fears: This perhaps implies liberation from the 
Eight Worldly Desires. 
5 Og Men (T.T.: Hog.Min.) Heaven: the central Heaven where Buddha 
Dorje-Chang resides. 
6 Naropa, the Door-Protector: Because Niiropa was one of the six famous 
professors of Vikramasila Monastery, in charge of one section (the North Section) of the School, he was so named. 
7 The crude bodies of Devas: Though the heavenly bodies of Devas are illuminating and magnificent, in comparison with the splendor of the "RewardBody of Buddha" (Sambhogakaya) they are crude and vulgar. 
8 This implies the six main Schools of Hinduism: (1) Nyiiya, (2) 
Vai~e­
sika, (3) Siimkhya, (4) Yoga, (5) Mimiimsa, and (6) Vedanta. 
9 The "Originally Pure": This is another term denoting the innate and pure 
Buddha-nature. 
10 The most important Key-Instruction of Mahiimudrii is relaxation. Only 
through complete relaxation of mind may the Mind-Essence be seen. 
11 The enlightened being feels that all becomings are conducive, and not obstructive, to his spiritual growth. 

--- PAGE 245 ---
THE ENLIGHTENMENT 
OF RECHUNGPA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
H
AVING circled Di Se Snow Mountain, Milarepa and his disciples returned to the Gray Cave of Dorje Tson of Gu Tang. The former patrons all came to visit the Jetsun, and asked him about his welfare and 
health. He told them that he felt extremely well and in turn inquired 
after their health. They replied: "It is by good fortune that under 
your protection and blessing we, too, are all very well and have not 
suffered from sickness or loss of life. Our livestock also thrives. We, 
on our side, are very glad to learn that you have successfully made the 
pilgrimage to Di Se without having met with any difficulties on your 
way. Please be kind enough to sing us a song of your well-being." 
Milarepa answered, "I am as happy as this -listen!" And he sang of 
the "Twelve Happinesses of Yoga": 
Like avoiding the pitfalls of evil, 
Happy is it to practice the Yoga of RenouncingOne' s-Own-Land. 
Like a good horse freeing itself from the bridle, 
Happy is it to practice the Yoga Free-from-Subjectand-Object! 
Like wild beasts creeping on low ground, 
Happy is it to practice Yoga in solitude! 
Like the eagle flying freely in the heavens, 
Happy is it to practice the Yoga of Conviction! 
--- PAGE 246 ---
Like vultures gliding freely through the sky, 
Happy is it to practice Yoga without hindrances. 
Like a shepherd restfully watching his sheep, 
Happy it is, in Yoga practice, 
To experience the Illuminating Void. 
Like the huge Mount Sumeru standing firm 
On the ground at the world's center, 
Happy it is to practice the steadfast Yoga without 
disturbance. 
Like the wide rivers flowing freely, 
Happy is the continual sensation of the Yoga 
Experience. 
Like a corpse lying quiet in the cemetery 
Doing nothing and having no worries, 
Happy is the Yoga of Non-action. 
Like a stone thrown in the ocean, that never returns, 
Happy is the Yoga of No-retuming.1 
Like the sun shining in the sky, 
All other lights o'ershadowing, 
Happy it is to practice the Yoga 
Brighter than all lights. 
Like leaves falling from the Dali tree, 
That can never grow again, 
Happy it is to practice the Yoga of No-birth. 
This is the song of the "Twelve Happinesses of Yoga." 
I now present it to you, my patrons, as a gift of 
Dharma. 
After listening to this song, the patrons all returned home with 
deep faith in their hearts. 
To test the accomplishment and experience of Rechungpa, and also 
to find out how strong was his spirit of renunciation, one day Milarepa 
casually sang for him the song of the "Twelve Deceptions": 

--- PAGE 247 ---
The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
Worldly affairs are all deceptive; 
So I seek the Truth Divine. 
Excitements and distractions are illusion; 
So I meditate on the Non-dual Truth. 
Companions and servants are deceptive; 
So I remain in solitude. 
Money and possessions are also deceptive; 
So if I have them, I give them away. 
Things in the outer world are all illusion; 
The Inner Mind is that which I observe. 
Wandering thoughts are all deceptive 
So I only tread the Path of Wisdom. 
Deceptive are the teachings of Expedient Truth;2 
The Final Truth is that on which I meditate. 
Books written in black ink are all misleading; 
I only meditate on the Pith-Instructions of the 
Whispered Lineage. 
Words and sayings, too, are but illusion; 
At ease, I rest my mind in the effortless state. 
Birth and death are both illusions; 
I observe but the truth of No-Arising. 
The common mind is in every way misleading; 
And so I practice how to animate Awareness. 
The Mind-holding Practice3 is misleading and 
deceptive; 
And so I rest in the realm of Reality. 
Rechungpa thought to himself: "My Guru is Buddha Himself; there 
is no illusory idea in his mind. But because of my incapacity for devotion, as well as that of others, he has sung me this song." And Rechungpa sang in answer to explain to his Guru his understanding on the teaching of View, Practice, and Action. 

--- PAGE 248 ---
Hearken to me, please, my Father Guru, 
My darkened mind is full of ignorance. 
Hold me fast with the rope of your compassion. 
At the crossroad where Realism and Nihilism meet 
I have lost my way in seeking the View of 
Non-Extremes; 
So no assurance have I in the knowledge of the Truth. 
Drowsy and distracted all the while, 
Bliss and Illumination are not yet my lot. 
And so I have not conquered llll attachment. 
I cannot free myself from taking and abandoning, 
And needlessly I continue my impulsive acts; 
So I have not yet destroyed all delusions. 
I was unable to shun all deeds of fraud 
And observe the Tantric Precepts without flaw; 
So I have yet to conquer all temptations. 
The illusory distinction between Saqlsara 
and NirvaQa 
I have not realized as the Self-Mind Buddha; 
So I have yet to find my way to Dharmakayal 
I was not able to equate hope with fear 
And my own face behold; 
So I have yet to win the Four Bodies of Buddha. 
I have been protected by your compassion in 
the past; 
Now, putting my whole being in your hands, 
.Pray, still grant me more of your blessings. 
Thereupon, Milarepa [sent his compassionate grace-wave to bless 
Rechungpa, and] said to him, pretendingly, "Oh, Rechungpa, you have 
had more understandings and experiences than those you have just told 
me. You should not hide anything from me. Be frank and candid." As 
Milarepa said this, Rechungpa suddenly became enlightened. At once 
he sang "The Seven Discoveries": 
Through the grace of my Father Guru, the holy Jetsun, 

--- PAGE 249 ---
The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
I now have realized the Truth in Seven Discoveries. 
In manifestations have I found the Void; 
Now, I have no thought that anything exists. 
In the Voidness have I found the Dharmakaya; 
Now, I have no thought of action. 
In myriad manifestations the Non-Dual have I found; 
Now, I have no thought of gathering or dispersing. 
In the Elements of Red and White,• 
Have I found the essence of equality; 
Now, I have no thought of accepting or rejecting. 
In the Body of Illusion5 I have found great bliss; 
Now, in my mind, there is no suffering. 
I have found the Transcendental in the world; 
Now, delusion has no hold upon my mind. 
In the Self-Mind I have found the Buddha; 
Now, in my mind Saq1sara no more exists. 
Milarepa then said to Rechungpa, "Your experience and understanding is close to real Enlightenment, but it is still not quite the same. Real 
Experience and true understanding should be like this." And he sang 
"The Eight [Supreme] Realms": 
He who sees the world and Voidness as the same, 
Has reached the realm of the True View. 
He who feels no difference between dream 
and waking, 
Has reached the realm of True Practice. 
He who feels no difference between Bliss 
and Voidness, 
Has reached the realm of True Action. 
He who feels no difference between "now" 
and "then," 
Has reached the realm of Reality. 

--- PAGE 250 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONG.S OF MJLAREPA 
He who sees that Mind and Voidness are the same, 
Has reached the realm of Dharmakaya. 
He who feels no difference between pain and pleasure, 
Has reached the realm of the True Teaching. 
He who sees human wishes and Buddha's Wisdom as 
the same, 
Has reached the realm of supreme Enlightenment. 
He who sees that Self-Mind and Buddha are alike, 
Has reached the realm of True Accomplishment. 
Thereafter, through the mercy and blessing of his Guru, Rechungpa 
gradually improved in understanding and Realization. He then composed "The Song of the Six Bardos,"6 in which he presented to Milarepa his insight and final understanding: 
I bow before the holy Gurus. 
In the Bardo where the great Void manifests 
There is no realisitic or nihilistic view; 
I do not share the thoughts of human sectaries. 
Beyond all apprehension is Non-existence now; 
Of the View this is my firm conviction. 
In the Bardo of Voidness and Bliss there is 
No object on which the mind can meditate, 
And so I have no need to practice concentration. 
I rest my mind without distraction in the natural 
state. 
This is my understanding of the Practice, 
I no longer feel ashamed before enlightened friends. 
In the Bardo with lust and without lust 
I see no Sa111saric bliss; 
And so, no more a hypocrite, I meet no bad companions. 
Whate'er I see before me I take as my companion. 
This is my conviction of the Action, 
No longer feel I shame before a gathering of great 
yogis. 

--- PAGE 251 ---
The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
Between vice and virtue I no more discriminate; 
The pure and impure arc now to me the same. 
Thus, never shall I be untruthful or pretentious. 
Now have I wholly mastered the Self-Mind. 
This is my understanding of Morality, 
No longer feel I shame before the Saints' assembly. 
In the (new-found] realm of Samsara and Nirvana 
Sentient beings and the Buddha are to me the same; 
And so I neither hope nor yearn for Buddhahood. 
At this moment, all my sufferings have become a 
pleasure. 
This is my understanding of Enlightenment, 
No longer feel I shame before enlightened beings. 
Having freed myself from words and meanings 
I speak no more the language of all scholars. 
I have no more doubts in my mind. 
The universe and all its forms 
Now appear but as the Dharmakaya. 
This is the conviction I have realized. 
No longer feel I shame before a gathering of great 
scholars. 
Milarepa was highly delighted, and said, "Rechungpa, this is indeed 
the real Experience and knowledge. You can truly be called a wellgifted disciple. Now there are three ways in which one may please one's 
Guru: First, the disciple should employ his faith and intelligence to 
gratify his Guru; then, through unmistakable learning and contempla· 
tion, he should enter the gate of Mahayana and Vajrayana, and practice them diligently with great determination; then finally, he can please 
his Guru with his real experiences of Enlightenment, which are produced step by step through his devotion. I do not like the disciple 
who talks much; the actual practice is far more important. Until the 
full Realization of Truth is gained, he should shut his mouth and 
work at his meditation. My Guru, Marpa, said to me: 'It does not 
matter much whether one knows a great deal about Sutras and Tantras. One should not merely follow the words and books, but should 
shut his mouth, unmistakably follow his Guru's verbal instructions, and 
meditate.' Therefore, you should also follow this admonishment, forgetting it not, and putting it into practice. If you can leave all Sa111saric 
affairs behind you, the great merits and accomplishments will all become yours." 

--- PAGE 252 ---
Rechungpa replied, "Dear Jetsun, please be kind enough to tell what 
Marpa said." Milarepa then sang "The Thirty Admonishments of my 
Guru": 
Dear son, these are the words He said to me: 
"Of all refuges, the Buddha's is the best; 
Of all friends, faith is most important; 
Of all evils, Nhamdog is the worst; 
Of all devils, pride; 
Of all vices, slander." 
He said: 
"He who does not purify his sins with the Four 
Powers7 
Is bound to wander in Sarpsara. 
He who with diligence stores not merit, 
Will never gain the bliss of Liberation. 
He who refrains not from committing the Ten Evils, 
Is bound to suffer pains along the Path. 
He who does not meditate on Voidness and 
Compassion, 
Will ne•:er reach the state of Buddhahood." 
He said: 
"If in this life you want Buddhahood, 
Observe your mind without diversion 
And practice the Six Y ogas, 
The essence and final teaching of all Tantras. 
Practice, too, the Skillful Path of Tantra, 
The essence, the final teaching of the PithInstruction. 
If you look for fame, goods, and recognition, 
You throw yourself into the mouth of devils. 
If others you revile, and praise yourself, 
You will fall into the abyss. 
If you tame not your elephantine mind, 
The teachings and Pith-Instruction will be useless. 
The greatest merit is to raise the Heart-forBodhi; 
To understand the Non-arising is the highest View. 

--- PAGE 253 ---
The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
Profound meditation is the teaching of the 
Skillful Path. 
The Nac;II and breathing exercises should be practiced too." 
He said: 
"Behold and recognize the face of the Innate-Born! 
Put yourself in the hands of holy beings! 
Do not dissipate your life by doing worthless 
things." 
He said: 
"Behold and watch your unborn mind, 
Look not for pleasures in Sarpsara, 
Think not that all sufferings are ill." 
He also said: 
"When you realize your mind, you become a Buddha. 
It is unnecessary to talk and do a lot! 
There is no other teaching more profound than 
this. 
Follow and practice, then, all these 
instructions!" 
After hearing this song, Rechungpa, improved greatly in Realization 
and Understanding. 
Later when Milarepa and his disciples were living ascetically during 
their retreat, many I)akinis came and offered them a sacramental 
feast. They addressed Milarepa thus: "It is good for you during your 
devotions to accept food and clothing from human beings, and also 
to receive a little heavenly nourishment from the I)akinis. We will 
always bring provisions for you." Milarepa replied, "The possessions, 
facilities, and food of the common people can never match the merits 
of Enlightenment and the power of Realization. Therefore, worldly 
needs are dispensible. Now, hearken to my song": 
I bow down to all Gurus. 

--- PAGE 254 ---
From the realm of Absolute Reality 
I, the Yogi Milarepa, sing this song; 
From the realm of Universal Non-existence 
I, Milarcpa, chant this hymn. 
Please listen, Mothers and :Oakinis. 
The Law of Cause and Effect is e'er supremeThe convincing Buddhist doctrine. 
How can common faiths e'er match it? 
Supreme it is to live and meditate alone; 
How can trance compare with this? 
Samadhi is supreme, free from "this" and "that"; 
How can common knowledge e'er attain it? 
"Essence" is supreme in the state of "AfterMeditation"; 
How can common practices ever equal it? 
Mindfulness beyond all words also is supreme; 
How can common actions e'er attain it? 
The unison of Love and Voidness is supreme; 
How can common accomplishment e'er reach it? 
Supreme, too, is my cotton robe that's never cold; 
How can the gaudy clothes of common people match it? 
Supreme is my Samadhi that's never hungry; 
How can meat and wine compare with it? 
This drink of mine comes from the stream of Bodhi; 
How can common drinks compare with it? 
Within, my heart is brimming with contentment; 
How can food and wealth o'ershadow it? 
My Guru, the Translator Marpa, is supreme; 
How can other yogis equal Him? 
Seeing the Buddha-face of the Self-Mind is supreme; 

--- PAGE 255 ---
The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
How can the common "patron Buddha" meditation 
match it? 
I, the Yogi Milarepa, am supreme; 
How can other yogis match me? 
My body is immune from pain and illness; 
How can drugs or doctors so insure it? 
Please listen and give judgement, oh :Oakinls, 
Where there is no light, I see but brightness; 
The light itself is very radiant too. 
Where there is no warmth, I feel well-heated; 
This single cotton robe has warmth in plenty. 
Where' er discomfort is, I rest in ease; 
This body of illusion is most comfortable. 
Where there is no joy, I feel most joyful; 
This life of dreams is itself delightful! 
I, the Yogi, feel but happiness and joy! 
Is not the Drajadorje Mountain high enough? 
If not, why would vultures float above it? 
If the cold December wind is not severe enough, 
How can it freeze the waterfalls and rivers? 
If my cotton clothing is not warmed by Inner-Heat, 
How can a single robe shut out the coldness? 
If Samadhi food does not sustain me, 
How can I e'er endure insatiate hunger? 
If there is no Stream-of-Bodhi for my drinking, 
How can I live without water and not thirst? 
If my Guru's Pith-Instructions are not profound enough, 
How can I conquer hindrances and devils? 
If a yogi has no Realization and Experience 
[To make him confident and full of joy] 
How can he ever meditate in solitude? 
--- PAGE 256 ---
These accomplishments are gained through the grace 
of my Guru. 
Thus should one concentrate on meditation practice. 
Having heard this song, the l)akinis exclaimed, "What you have said 
is indeed wonderful! Tomorrow, a well-destined disciple will come here. 
Please take care of him." With these words, they all disappeared like the 
rainbow. 
The next day, a few patrons came on a visit from Gu Tang. They 
asked Milarepa to preach the Dharma for them. Whereupon, the Jetsun imparted to them the Prayer of Taking Refuge, together with explanations on the benefits of practicing the Dharma. The patrons asked, 
"Do you also practice this Prayer of Taking Refuge?" Milarepa replied, 
"Yes. This prayer is my sole shelter, and I depend upon it alone in my 
devotion and practice. You sho:~ld also pray earnestly to your Guru and 
the Three Precious Ones, not merely by words but by sincerely taking 
them as your true Refuge. The benefit of this is very great as I have 
told you before. All of you should therefore be very happy and satisfied 
with this prayer." Milarepa then sang a song in which he described the 
different frames of reference in which the Refuges are set, and urged 
them to practice the Dharma. 
Obeisance to all Gurus. 
The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha 
Are the three outer Refuges; 
Even I take them as my shelter. 
By putting all my trust in them, 
I have gained joy and satisfaction. 
Fortune will come, if in them you take your refuge. 
The Guru, the Patron Buddha, and the l)akinis 
Are the three inner Refuges. 
Even I take them as my shelter. 
By putting all my trust in them, 
I have gained joy and satisfaction. 
Fortune will come, if in them you take your refuge. 
The Nac;lis, PraQa, and Bindu are the three secret 
Refuges; 
Even I take them as my shelter. 
By putting all my trust in them, 
I have gained joy and satisfaction. 

--- PAGE 257 ---
The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
Fortune will come, if in them you take your refuge. 
Form, Voidness, and Non-distinction 
Are the three real Refuges; 
By patting all my trust in them, 
I have gained joy and satisfaction. 
Fortune will come, if in them you take your refuge. 
If you look not to the Refuges, 
Who will protect you from eternal suffering? 
Day and night the rotting house of your body 
Is invaded by the [Four] Elements. 
Through months and years, 
Rain brings it to dissolution. 
To the dying these eroding drops 
Bring neither joy nor pleasure. 
'Tis like the shadow of the setting sun; 
You may try to fly away from it 
But never can you escape. 
Observation of death is a Buddhist's "teacher," 
From whom one learns to practice worthy deeds. 
One should always think, and remember, 
That joy is absent at the time of dying. 
If a sinner sees the nature of death, 
He learns a good lesson of truth. 
He will then ponder on the thought, 
"How regretful I will be when that moment comes!" 
If a man of wealth sees death around him, 
He has learned a good lesson of truthThat goods and money are his great foes. 
Let him then ponder on the thought, 
"I should try always to be generous!" 
If an old man feels that death is near him, 
He has learned a good lesson of truth -
That life is short and transient. 
Let him then ponder on the thought, 
--- PAGE 258 ---
"Life is, after all, a sad dream." 
If a young man sees death around him, 
He has learned a good lesson of truth -
That life is short and fades soon to oblivion. 
Let him then practice his devotions! 
Our parents bear the burdens of our worries, 
But orphans must endure them by themselves. 
A smooth, fine leather coat is indeed a comfortBut, beyond imagination, for him who never wore one. 
Crops on the farm are the cure for poverty, 
But those who do not work can ne'er enjoy them. 
[A couplet is omitted here as the text is corrupt. Tr.] 
He who practices the Dharma will be joyful; 
But those who practice not, can never share it. 
Give more away in gifts, and you will ne'er be hungry. 
If you want to conquer drowsiness and sleep, 
Practice more good deeds.8 
Remembering the miseries of the lower Realms 
Helps one and all to practice Buddhism. 
After hearing this song, many patrons became devoted Buddhists. 
Among the group, there was one young man who had confirmed within 
him an immutable faith towards Milarepa. He asked permission to follow him in order to give him service. Milarepa thought, "This is the 
man whom the l)akinis predicted. I should take him as my disciple." 
And he imparted the Initiation and instructions to him. After practicing these teachings, the young man attained Accomplishment and 
Liberation. He was known as Ron Chon Repa, one of the close sons 
of Milarepa. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting Ron Chon Repa on his later 
trip to Drajadorjc Tson. 

--- PAGE 259 ---
The Enlightenment of Rechungpa 
NOTES 
1 Yoga of No-returning (T.T.: Phyir.Mi.lDog.Pahi.rNal.hByor.): implying an 
advanced stage on the Path. \Vhen a yogi reaches it he will never regress in his 
spi;itual development or fall back again into Sal]lsara. 
2 The Expedient Truth, or the Expedient Teachings: There are two very important terms in Mahayana Buddhism which explicitly reflect the Mahayana 
Buddhist view and its evaluation into the various conflicting doctrines as upheld 
by different Schools of Buddhism, and by other religions. One is known as the "Expedient Teaching" (T.T.: Dran.Don.), and the other, as the "Ultimate," or "Final 
Teaching" (T.T.: Nes.Don.). The "Expedient Teachings" are those doctrines arranged and preached for the unevolved or not-yet-ripened devotees who are not 
ready to receive the higher form of teaching. The "Final Teachings" are those 
which may be described as supreme and ultimate. 
The myriads of Buddhas see only one final Reality in the realm of Supreme 
Enlightenment. However, to enable all sentient beings to realize this Reality, various approaches, teachings, or steps appropriate to different groups and individuals 
are necessary because all sentient beings do not share the same dispositions, capacities, and Karmas. A teaching that is beneficial to one group or to one individual 
may not be helpful to another; hence, a variety of approaches is needed to ripen 
these innumerable types of people. For the Hinayana-bent, Hinayana Buddhism is 
taught; for the Mahayana-bent, Mahayana Buddhism. This approach is also true for 
Christians, Hindus, and other religionists- an appropriate teaching, even in the 
guise of a different faith, is wisely given to all and sundry who may require it. 
Because of this all-embracing attitude, Mahayana Buddhism is impregnated 
with an extremely inclusive and tolerant spirit, which has been unmistakably 
demonstrated throughout Buddhist history. This recognition of the value and usefulness of all religions is typically reflected in the popular Buddhist proverb, "Since 
sentient beings suffer many different sicknesses, Buddha, the King of Physicians, 
has to prescribe for them various treatments and medicines; hence all the teachings 
of the different Schools and religions arc merely the differing remedies prescribed 
by Him for the benefit of each case." 
Although the Expedient Teachings are necessary for those who have not evolved 
to a level advanced enough to accept the highest teachings (the Final Truth), they 
do lay a foundation for approaching it; without these Expedient Teachings, it 
would not be possible for many who, for the time being, do not yet possess the capacity, to appreciate and practice the higher teachings. 
3 Mind-holding Practice: Most of the meditation practices are devised for 
the development of mental concentration, i.e., to hold onto an object in one's 
mind's-eye. In other words, a mental effort is required in all of them. But the meditation of Mahamudra is of a quite different nature. It is effortless and natural; in its 
practice no object whatsoever is held in the yogi's mind. In comparison with the 
teaching of Mahamudra, all others are temporal and expedient. 
4 The White Element is the positive, and the Red Element the negative force 
of the body. 
5 Body of Illusion: Any body possessing form and attributes is illusory; this 
applies to both Sal]lsaric and NirvaJ;tiC bodies, including the Reward Body and 
Transformation Body of Buddha. 
6 Bardo here does not mean the state after death, it means "in-between" 
states of all kinds. 

--- PAGE 260 ---
7 The Four Powers through which one's sins can be purified are: 
( 1) The Power of sincere repentance. 
(2) The Power of determination not to commit the same sin again. 
(3) The Power of undertaking good deeds to compensate for the wrong 
deeds previously committed. 
(4) The Power of contemplating on the void nature of being. 
8 To lessen one's drowsiness by practicing good deeds: Some people constantly 
feel drowsy while they are practicing meditation. As soon as they cease meditating, 
drowsiness disappears. If all methods of curing drowsiness are tried without success, 
it is due, according to many Gurus, to sins committed in the past. The remedy for 
this is to practice confession·prayers and perform diligently various meritorious deeds. 

--- PAGE 261 ---
THE CONVERSION OF 
A DYING BONIST 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
E
ARLY one morning on the eighth day of a lunar month, when Jetsun Milarepa was meditating at Drajadorje Tson and observing 
silence, a number of Oakinls dressed as earthly ladies carne to him 
and prophesied: 
Oh, silent yogi with great power of will 
Who practices austerity, 
The sole lion in the midst of all this snow, 
Who sees, alone, Sarpsara in Nirviil)a, 
Listen to us - the four ])akin! sisters 
Who come to prophesy. 
Tomorrow, in the early morning, 
Go to the eastern shore of Baltang Lake, 
Where people sin and sport in wanton pleasures. 
You, the Lion of the snow mountain, 
Should help them back into the path of virtue, 
Guiding those who have lost their way to the 
right Path. 
After conveying this message to the Jetsun, the Oakinls vanished. 
Accordingly the next day Milarepa journeyed eastward. On the way, 
he met a shepherd. When the shepherd saw him walking above the 
ground -his feet never touching the earth -an unshakable faith toward Milarepa arose within him. He offered the Jetsun his own food, 
and asked for the teachings of Dharma. Whereupon Milarepa preached 
--- PAGE 262 ---
on the Law of Kharma; on the errors of Saq~sara; on the difficulties of 
obtaining favorable human birth, body, and environment; and lastly, on 
the unpredictableness and inevitability of death. Convinced by these 
teachings, the shepherd said, "Dear Lama, your preaching has been a 
reminder of the great sufferings of Saf!1Sara. On thinking it over, [I find] 
I have no more desire for any gain or loss, happiness or misery in this 
life. The sufferings which you have mentioned, distress me so much that 
I feel I cannot bear them any longer. Please give me some instruction 
that can help me." "Very well," said Milarepa, "I shall teach you." The 
shepherd then confided to him, "I - and I alone -know of a secret 
cave called Mamo Tson. Please, let us go there." 
When they arrived at the cave, the shepherd offered food and gave 
service to the Jetsun, and then asked for the teachings that would release him from Saq~saric suffering. Milarepa then taught him how to 
meditate. [Not long after], the shepherd confided, "When I am concentrating, I feel very peaceful and there is no suffering whatsoever. But 
when my mind begins to wander, pictures of the miseries in Saq~sara all 
appear before me; I can hardly bear the distressing experience of seeing 
them. With your great compassion, please bring me to the state of eternal happiness." Milarepa replied, "If you want to be always happy, you 
must ever avoid sinful deeds and follow my example by practicing all 
the virtues." The shepherd answered, "I am willing to do so for the sake 
of attaining the longed for perpetual happiness. I would like to become 
your servant. Please take me with you." 
Milarepa recognized that this shepherd was a destined disciple, so 
he took him in and granted him the Initiation and Pith-Instructions. 
Later on, the shepherd was known as Tsiwo Repa, the most oustanding student among those "Disciples-with-Realization." 
On the morning of the day that the Jetsun met Tsiwo Repa, the Oakinis said to him, "There is a place called Lapu; you should go there." 
And so Milarepa went to Lapu where lived a very rich old man, a pious 
follower of Bon, who had many sons. Recently he had contracted a very 
serious disease. On the day of Milarepa's visit, one of this man's sons 
had just returned home from consulting a diviner, who had said that the 
reruedy was to kill one hundred yaks, one hundred goats, and one hundred sheep, and with the meat to hold a great festival and sacrifice for the 
Bon monks. Following this instruction, the rich man's sons had made all 
the arrangements for the feast and were just about to slaughter the animals when the Jetsun arrived. 
Milarepa, on first reaching Lapu, had met a girl on her way to fetch 
water and had asked alms from her. She informed him of the-great Bon 
festival to be held for the sick rich man, saying that she was sure he would 

--- PAGE 263 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
find alms if he went there. As Milarepa approached the rich man's house 
he saw all kinds of people entering it. It seemed that anyone could walk 
in, even the dogs. Nevertheless, the hosts said, "Dear Lama, our father 
is very sick. Please leave us." Milarepa replied, "All I want is something 
to eat. Please give me food." The sons then prepared a little food for him, 
and were about to send him away, when the sick man's relatives and 
doctors began to gather round to observe his illness. Milarepa went to 
them asking for charity. 
When the rich man beheld Milarepa's face, a great faith arose in him, 
and somehow a change took place in his mind. He clutched Milarepa's 
robe and besought him, saying, "Dear Lama, I am a [living] man for 
only today or tomorrow. Look on me with yow compassion!" Thus he 
implored, while tears streamed down his face. Milarepa said, "It is a good 
omen that you have such faith in me. If I cure your illness, will you 
renounce the world and practice Dharma?" The rich man replied, "If I'm 
relieved of this illness, I shall do whatever you say. Not only will I practice Dharma, but I will also cause my sons to become Buddhists." The 
Jetsun thought to himself, "The 1)akinis prophesied that I should convert certain evil and pleasure-loving men and thus accomplish benevolent 
deeds and give blessings to all. This must be the opportunity [they] 
meant, so I shall act accordingly." Whereupon he said to the rich man, 
"You may slaughter all the yaks and goats you wish, but that will not 
cure your illness. In fact, it will only make your situation worse. Rather, 
you should set all those cattle free. On the other hand, I know a method 
that will definitely cure you; but first- what religion do you profess?" 
The sick man answered, "While I do not disbelieve in Buddhism, I have 
always loved and placed my faith in Bon." "In that case," said Milarcpa, 
"You should now dismiss all these Bon monks and doctors. I will perform a 'Bon' ceremony for you which will certainly help your recovery." To which the eldest son of the rich man added, "I propose that both 
the Bon monks and this Lama perform their ceremonies together. Cannot this be done?" "Your suggestion is apt," the Jetsun replied, "but 
there are already too many doctors and too much hocus-pocus here. All 
this does not help. It would be better to dismiss them all." The sick man 
supported him by adding, "We should do what the Lama says." Accordingly, both the ritualists and the physicians were dismissed. Learning of 
this, 'the people began to murmur, "Are not the ceremony-makers and 
doctors capable? Surely, this foreign yogi can neither diagnose nor help. 
The sick man will probably die soon." After voicing such thoughts, they 
became all the more worried and distressed. 
The sick man asked Milarepa, "What animal, then, should we slaughter 
for an offering?" The Jetsun said, "In the performance of my ceremony, 
no sacrifice is necessary. I have a 'Bon'1 prayer of my own. Listen at-

--- PAGE 264 ---
tentivelyl" Thereupon, Milarepa, chanting a Bon melody after the Bon 
manner, sang for the sick man "The Parable of the Twenty-two Family 
Members": 
"Sou, yon yon, yon, yon, yon yon ngo ___ .. • 
In the beginning of time, arose a manifestation. 
At that moment, as the first of all happenings, 
The outer objects appeared as something with 
attributes. 
The assembling of elements, the Aggregations, 
[Formed] the great city, the Three Realms of Sarp.sara 
The inner mind, which discerns, was comprehended 
as one with qualities; 
In the Illuminating-Void Awareness, 
Thereby sprang up a myriad ideas and perceptions. 
This is the source of all Karma and Klesasl 
All dwellings in this distressed world are illusory, 
For they are built upon forms·of delusion. 
Because of clinging to the god and father image, 
One fashions his active mind as the ego. 
Because of clinging to the mother and goddess image, 
One's mind pursues a myriad things. 
When the mother and father united, 
Then were born the twelve Nidana sons3 
And the eight Consciousness daughters. 
These brothers and sisters, with their parents, 
Totaled twenty-two. 
From the arising of this family 
Came the four-and-eighty thousand Klesas 
And the three hundred and sixty Distractions. 
Thus arose the eighty thousand Evils and Hindrances, 
And the four hundred and four kinds of disease. 
This is the first chapter of my song, 
The Chapter of the Members of the Family. 
All the two-and-twenty members are beset with illness, 
They are wrapped in the sickness of a blinded mind 
And they suffer from a myriad affiictions. 

--- PAGE 265 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
Fever inflames their upper parts, 
The fire of anger ever burns within them, 
While like yaks distraught they deeply groan. 
Chills plague their lower parts 
And churning pools of lust 
Drive them to lechery. 
Skran-blindness4 afflicts their middle parts; 
The dropsy of ego-clinging swells and distends them. 
Troubled are they by sub-Pral)a sickness 
And choked by swollen pride; 
Diseased in heart, 
They denounce others while they praise themselves. 
They make their bed among the Five Poisonous 
[Desires]. 
Surrendering their minds 
To the nonsense of "this" and "that," 
They lose all appetite for being virtuous. 
For the waters of sin they thirst 
And vomit virtue's medicine. 
To the Ten Directions they spit the saliva of 
worthless talk; 
They take the Eight Worldly Claims for clothing, 
Relatives of the Ten Evils surround their beds. 
Minds clouded, they wander in the realms 
Of distraction, longing for food and wealth. 
Dark and hopeless are these diseases. 
This is the second chapter of my song, 
The Chapter Describing Sicknesses. 
For diseases such as these what is the cure? 
"Bon" will help, and divination too; 
Thus, I, the Yogi, will divine for you. 
A messenger, the transiency of all lives, 
Was sent to ask a divination. 
An expert diviner was then called, 
And a cushion of faith unshakable provided. 
The beverage of trust was mixed 
And a barley-heap for augury arranged 
--- PAGE 266 ---
In veneration of the Dharma. 
The question, the inquiry into the profound teaching 
of Dharma, 
Was presented to the soothsayer. 
The augur, a proficient Guru, charts 
A horoscope of the Four Elements. 
He counts the rounds of years, the Twelve Nidanas, 
And also numbers the Eight Trigrams- or 
Consciousnesses. 
The diagrams of the Nine Vehicles5 are drawn. 
A prediction of good or evil is thus made. 
This is the third chapter of my song, 
The Chapter of Divining by the Stars. 
Reading the chart, the soothsayer prophesies: 
For these two-and-twenty people, 
The omen is bad indeed. 
From the time of no-beginning, 
On the foundation of Sa111sara and Nirval)a 
Was set up a stove of mental blindness. 
The host, pure manifestation, was singed by words. 
The burners, hate and lust, left behind a burning-spot. 
Because of stove, fire, and burning-spot, 
The Wisdom-Father god left the house and went to 
Heaven; 
The local god of the Great Bliss withdrew and 
disappeared; 
The conquering god of Self-Awareness also went away. 
Because these three great gods withdrew, 
The demons could send forth afflictions. 
Hence arose the Eight Dharmas of the world, 
And the pain of life came into being in Sa111sara. 
Burning anger- the most dreadful demon; 
Stirring lust- that pernicious demoness; 
Blind ignorance -
the fierce dragon demon; 
Stinging jealousy - the demon called Tsan Rigs;8 
Egotism and prejudice- another, named Rtor Legs,1 
Self-praise and self-inflation -the demon styled 
Mamo;8 

--- PAGE 267 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
Evil deeds and habitual-thinking- the dread demon 
called Shen Dre0 -
My host, these are the demons which afflict you. 
According to the divination, 
Your life is in great danger, 
For whoe'er is born, will die. 
According to the divination, 
Your family affairs are not auspicious; 
At the end of a gathering there must be departure. 
According to the divination, 
Your monetary affairs do not prosper, 
For the end of gain is loss. 
According to the divination, 
Your dealings with your foes are not lucky, 
For no longer can you take the upper hand. 
To reverse these evil omens, 
Let us hold a "Bon" service. 
This is the fourth chapter of my song, 
The Ominous Divination of your Life. 
Now I, the Yogi, will chant a "Bon" prayer for you. 
"Bon," in its deeper teaching, says: 
"In the morning of the first day was laid 
The foundation of Heaven's Tripitaka;10 
The ransom was given of hearing, practice, and 
contemplation." 
The sacramental offerings of pure precept are now 
prepared, 
And the hymns of the four Tantras now are chanted. 
The initiatory gift which frees from craving is 
presented. 
For the disappearance of the Father into Heaven, 
The recognition of basic blindness 
Is the remedy I offer. 
For the withdrawal of the local gods of the Great 
Bliss, 
Victory over the Four Demons is the remedy I offer. 
For the absence of the conquering god of SelfAwareness, 
The ransom of Self-Renunciation is my offer. 
--- PAGE 268 ---
The evil thoughts of the Eight Worldly Affairs, 
I amputate with the Awareness-knife that is free 
from craving. 
To cure the lives of pain in this distressing world, 
I offer the balm of Universal Bliss. 
The fire-like, angry demon 
I poison with the Wisdom of the Void; 
The lust-stirring demoness 
I conquer with Mind-Essence. 
To quell the dragon demon of blind ignorance, 
I summon the eight dragons, Self-liberating Forms. 
To the king of demons, suffocating pride, 
I give the hart's horn of the Wisdom of the Void. 
To conquer the Tsan demon, stinging jealousy, 
I raise the arrow-scarf, the Wisdom of Accomplishment. 
To the bragging, self-praising demon called Mamo, 
I recite the prayer of the Non-existence-of-Self-andOthers. 
To cleanse clinging to self and egotisms, 
I make altruistic offerings. 
To nullify the evil of habitual-thinking, the 
Shen Ore demon, 
I perform the conquering demon dance, the Voidness 
of Mental Functions. 
If there be harmful demons, 
These remedies will dispel them. 
If there be ghosts of prosperity, 
These acts will capture them. 
If you make sacramental offerings, 
Do so in this way. 
Mind-Nature has nor birth nor death; 
Through this "Bon" understanding 
Threats to life are overcome. 
The companion of Self-Manifestation 
Gathers not nor separates, 
But overcomes all threats of family strife. 
Transcendental property cannot be exhausted; 
By knowing this is the fear of poverty dispelled. 

--- PAGE 269 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
Through the teaching of this "Bon" doctrine, 
III omens and divination are reversed. 
If one understands [the Dharma] truly, 
Even the sufferings he undergoes 
Will appear to him as Divine Instructions. 
Through this "Bon" teaching, 
All evil encounters are transformed. 
This is the fifth chapter of my song, 
The Chapter of Subduing Devil-demons. 
Oh, family of two-and-twenty members! 
The ill of your mind-blindness has been cured, 
The painful groaning of self-clinging ended. 
Oh sick man! Upon your face appears 
A fair complexion- the Illuminating-Void; 
Food and drink- the illuminating and blissful SamadhiBecome delicious and appetizing to you! 
The sick man is now grateful for his cure; 
With heartfelt sincerity, he renders thanks 
And makes propitiation. 
He sends his son, Self-Awareness, 
To the mountain of the Great Perfection.11 
The shepherd boy, Constant-Mindfulness, 
Then takes a yak- the Nine Successive Vehicles, 
A sheep- the Four Tantras, and a goat- the Three 
Canons. 
Thence, upon the plain of Universal Equality 
Guests are summoned to a feast of Myriad Wisdoms. 
The oblation with butter is anointed, 
Together with the food of Siinyata. 
The arrow-scarf of Learning and Contemplation is 
spread out. 
Appreciation is expressed to all the company. 
Before the Guru, the soothsayer of skill, 
Is hung the human skull of Faith, Veneration, and 
Sincerity, 
For, with the holy teaching of "Bon" he rides 
The horse of Skillful-Wisdom. 
To the all-perfect "Bon" Body 
--- PAGE 270 ---
He offers a yak of the Nine Successive Vehicles. 
To the conquering gods, the Five Nirmfn;akayas, 
He offers a sheep of the Four Tantras. 
To the Life-god, the Transformation Body of Tathagata, 
He offers a Tripitaka goat. 
To the Goddess of Medicine who cures all diseases, 
He offers a sacrificial meal of the Four Immeasurables.12 
Such are the sacrifices and propitiations. 
This is the sixth chapter of my song, 
The Chapter of Propitiation and Sacrificial Offering. 
In the wide courtyard of the "Bon," 
Are tethered yak and sheep and goat. 
The butcher, All-Knowing Wisdom, 
Sharpens the sword of Knowledge 
And opens the life hole of Two Preparations.13 
The butcher then severs the liferoot (spine] of 
the Two Hindrances14 
And flays the skin of all-disturbing thoughts. 
Understanding the meaning of the Sutras and Tantras, 
The butcher, knowingly, cleaves the limbs. 
Relying on the holy sayings and sound judgment, 
He divides the various parts 
\Vith the cleaver of the Pith-Instructions, 
Chopping into pieces all the flesh. 
The various portions of the meat, the "Bon" form, 
Are piled into a cauldron, the "Bon" essence. 
The three firestones of Primordial Trikaya are laid, 
And the fire of-Four Infinites is lit. 
He boils well the meat 'til it is sweet and tenderThe consummation of Experience and Enlightenment. 
Then he takes out the meat, the unison of Meditation 
and Activity. 
In the great mansion of "Bon" essence, 
In the illusory city of Six Realms, 
To the feast throng crowds of guests. 
The banquet is arranged by skillful handsThose of the Five Great \Visdoms. 
The food and drinks- inany yet oneAre offered to all guests without discrimination. 

--- PAGE 271 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
To the wise Succession Gurus who have the power to 
bless, 
The upper-body is offered in complete perfection. 
To the Guru who illustrates the holy words and 
Pith-Instructions, 
The liferoot [spine] of Bodhi, the Skillful Path, 
is served. 
To the Guru who frees all beings from Sa111sara 
The pure eyeballs are given. 
To the Guru who knows the words and meanings 
[of the Buddhist teaching], 
The tongue that tastes all flavors then is given. 
To the virtuous, precept-observing monks, 
Are served the pleasant parts, pure and pacified. 
To the men of "Bon" who know the Law of Karma, 
Are given the meat and wine of "benevolent deeds." 
To the yogi who knows the truth of Non-existence, 
The fat of the Great Bliss is presented. 
To the firm protector of the Buddhist doctrine, 
Is given the gullet which brings benefits to all. 
To the meditator of the Skillful Tantric Path, 
The upper breast of greatest rapture is presented. 
To the great yogi who meditates on the transiency 
of being, 
The lower breast of the Skillful Bodhi-Path, is 
served. 
To the yogi without sectarian ideas, 
Is offered the castrated ram of all delight. 
To the yogi with compassion that embraces all, 
The knuckles and joints of the Four Infinities are 
given. 
--- PAGE 272 ---
To the man who is disgusted with this world, 
Is presented the breastbone, free from acts and craving. 
To the one who practices the main teaching of "Bon," 
The four limbs, indispensible to life, are served. 
To the physician, the nourishing Bodhi-Mind, 
The backbone of this life and that beyond, is offered. 
To all followers who are faithful and sincere 
The heart, the essence of instruction, is presented. 
To the steadfast one who ne'er forsakes the Path of 
Virtue, 
Is given the liver- Cause-and-Effect that never fails. 
To the industrious follower, are presented 
The kidneys, Skill and Wisdom. 
To beginners in the Dharma are presented 
The feet, the well-designed Expedient Truths. 
To the yogi, who always heeds his meditation practice, 
Is given the herdsman's meat, the essential 
Pith-Instruction. 
This is the seventh chapter of my song, 
The Chapter that invites Superior Beings to a Feast. 
Such was the feast that Milarepa served, 
And then, the worthy guests went home. 
Though the universal foundation [Alaya] of all men 
is one, 
Their conduct and dispositions vary greatly. 
Therefore, to arrogant and pretentious monks, 
Is given the penis that e'er clings to form. 
To the teacher who follows nought but words, 
The skinless and decayed part of the legs is served. 

--- PAGE 273 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
To proud, pompous, and evil priests 
The meatless nape is offered. 
To proud black magicians, who practice sorcery, 
The neck grease, maker of black-bitterness, is given. 
To bigoted and sectarian monks 
Is given the spinal marrow of disputation. 
To greedy and contemptible solicitors, 
The barren nose-tip of vanity is given. 
To the yogi who strolls about the village, 
The rumor-hungry ears are presented. 
To disciples of small faith but with gross heresies, 
The ill-rewarding spleen is served. 
To the person who upsets and subverts the Brotherhood, 
The bitter gall is given. 
To the "grand" teachers, who have not realized 
Mind-Essence, 
The midriff, the ostentatious but vain Mal)<;lala, is 
offered. 
To the yogi whose meditation practice is merely of 
the mouth, 
The lung, so tasteless yet so large in size, is 
served. 
To the yogi who knows little but boasts much, 
The skin of the stomach is presented. 
To town-dwellers, "Bon" monks who eat up life, 
The gullet, which fosters lust and hate, is given. 
To fraudulent forecasters who throw lots, 
The water-holding bladders are presented. 
To the presumptuous man who claims there is no Karma, 
Is served the tail, symbol of erroneous views. 
--- PAGE 274 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
To those who lack both modesty and scruple 
Is served the anus, which ruins them and others. 
To yogis, who cling to mind in meditation, 
The brain, the source of blindness and folly, is 
offered. 
To charlatans who claim that they have special 
teachings, 
Are served the intestines, rounded like Sarpsara. 
To those who lust and crave, is given 
The goiter, with which all are sore afflicted. 
To those indifferent to the truth of Voidness 
The cartilage, 15 which is neither meat nor fat, is 
served. 
To people with small merit but great ambition 
The tasteless and useless throat is given. 
To persons who know little but want to 
teach 
Are served the entrails from the lower parts. 
To foolish yogis who blindly dwell in caves, 
Tripe, smooth outside but coarse within, is given. 
To him whose chief desire is to gather riches, 
Is served the lower portion of the gullet. 
To mean and brawling women 
The head, with all its holes, is given. 
To mean but wealthy men, 
The round and storing belly is presented. 
To people who see nothing but this life, 
The testicles are served, fair on the surface but 
all foul within. 
To the patron with sweet words but sullied heart, 
The worthless, black intestines are presented. 

--- PAGE 275 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
To women who confuse themselves while still 
reviling others, 
The teeth, of stony hardness, are served up. 
To parents who at home have many mouths to feed, 
Skin, both tough and meatless, is presented. 
To the person who has nothing whatsoever, 
But toils and struggles for his family, 
The useless bowels are given. 
Incapable disciples who rebel 
Are served with thin and meatless soup. 
To those who e'er postpone their Dharma practice, 
Are given the remnants, symbol of their laziness. 
To the countless sentient beings in the plane of 
Bardo 
Are thrown the final scraps of meat. 
The Four Initiations16 of self-liberation from the 
Five Gates11 
Are given by the butcher of All-Knowing Wisdom; 
And with the jug of Wisdom that is immutable, 
Sweet wine is offered to all guests without 
discrimination. 
I, the rich man, have now prepared a feast for you, 
So eat and drink, dear guests, just as you please. 
This is the eighth chapter of my song, 
The Chapter of Dining at the Feast with Guests. 
Now is the time to speak a few propitious words; 
Words, surely to be heard by all the Buddhas. 
The Precious Ones do not appear on earth but stay 
in Dharmadhatu, 
While my Guru adorns me by sitting on my head 
And my brothers in the Dharma sit in rows [before me]. 
--- PAGE 276 ---
The first thing one should remember is the 
transiency of life; 
Then he should read the lives of holy Saints. 
Next, he should study the simple or comprehensive 
Sutras, 
Choosing them to meet his own requirements. 
Then he should contemplate on the Instructions. 
If in this song I have hidden anything from you, 
If my preaching has been unsound or incomplete, 
If I have transgressed or misrepresented anything, 
I beg forgiveness from the Holy Ones. 
[Milarepa then continued]: 
Now, it is time for me, your host, to sing a 
song of pride. 
At first, when I had contracted this disease, 
I sent for a diviner, a yogi of devotion. 
As he revealed the divination, 
Unsparingly I offered the sacrificial ransom. 
When he performed the ritual of offering, 
I realized 
He was indeed a free-handed yogi 
For his riches were truly inexhaustible. 
Then he served the feast and entertained 
His guests with all propriety. 
I became aware he was an experienced yogi; 
When he spoke, after the dinner, 
He proved that he could teach us all. 
When the feast was over, he gracefully gave thanks. 
Lastly, he wished for final liberation of all men. 
Oh, who is this "Bon"? Of whose "Bon" is he? 
He is the "Bon" whose family numbers two-and-twenty, 
He calms the fears of those who are besieged, 
He is the "Bon" who removes malignant pressures. 
This is my little after-dinner song. 
Oh guests, drink ye and be drunk with the wine 
of Reality! 

--- PAGE 277 ---
The Conversion of a Dying Bonist 
In a happy mood, let us sing and sport and play! 
It is happy to be blessed, and a joy to meditate! 
Cheerful, cheerful, are these after-dinner words. 
May all rejoice, be gay and full of mirth. 
Happy it is to vomit when drunk with devotion, 
Happy to shout and cry under the blessing. 
Ever, then, be joyful under the grace of your Gurus! 
This is the ninth chapter of my song, 
The Chapter of the Sermon After Feasting. 
So Milarepa sang, mimicking the Bon way of chanting. Hearing it, the 
sick man was blessed and cured. Sons, daughters, servants, and friends, 
including some learned Lamas, were so delighted that one could hardly 
describe their joy. The villagers declared, "It is indeed miraculous to revive a dying man. The blessing of Dharma is surely greater than that of 
the Bons!" An unalterable faith in the Jetsun arose in them all. The rich 
man then addressed the Jetsun, saying, "Dear Lama, your preachings 
were all Buddhist; they were not of Bon. I have always been a follower 
of Bon and believed its teachings, but now I will become a Buddhist and 
put my whole faith in Buddhism- I, and my sons, and all my family 
and household." The Jetsun gave assent, and thus the whole family, 
including the father with his eight sons, became Buddhists. 
Among the sons was one who had been an expert in Bon, which he 
had mastered to a perfect degree and in which he thoroughly believed. 
But after his father's cure, an immutable faith toward the Jetsun and 
Dharma awoke in him. He said to Milarepa, "Outwardly, the practice 
and words used by Bon and Dharma appear alike, but the compassion and· 
grace are different and so are the achievements. Bon practices are greedy 
and covetous. In whatever ceremony is held, at least one living being 
will be slaughtered as an offering. The gods we worship are all worldly. 
When a follower is about to die, he has no real assurance within himself. His heart is filled with fear and confusion. From now on, I will renounce Bon and become a Buddhist. Please accept me as your servantdisciple and allow me to go with you." It occurred to Milarepa that this 
man was a well.destined person. He, therefore, took him for a disciple 
and granted him the Initiations and Pith-Instructions. Eventually, this 
young man attained Liberation and all the Accomplishments. He became known as Shen Com Repa, one of the close disciples of Milarepa. 
His father and his brothers all gave their best service and offerings to the 
Jetsun while he dwelt at Langgo Ludu Tson, Bepu Mamo Tson, and 
Barkan Gi Tson. They entered the Gate of Liberation and followed the 

--- PAGE 278 ---
Path of the All-Knowing Ones, thus preventing themselves from falling 
into the miserable realms of Sarpsara. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting Tsiwo Repa, the outstanding 
enlightened Yogi, and Shen Com Repa, the close son-disciple of Milarepa, at Bepu Mamo Tson and Lapu Paima Tson. 
NOTES 
1 Milarepa did not, of course, perform a Bon ritual; he merely mimicked the 
Bon cult in fun. 
2 This is the first line of a chant in which the Bon monks intone their hymns. 
Milarepa derisively mimicked the Bon way of singing in this song. 
3 The Twelve Nidanas: The general twelve successive stages that characterize 
Saf!!Saric becomings are: (I) ignorance, (2) action, (3) consciousness, (4) name 
and form, ( 5) the six sense organs, (6) contact, (7) sensation, (8) craving, (9) 
grasping, (10) existing, (11) birth, (12) old age and death. 
4 The name of a disease. 
5 The Nine Vehicles (T.T.: Theg.Pa.Rim.Pa.dGu.): The Ningmaba (T.T.: 
r~in.Ma.Pa.) School of Tibetan Buddhism classifies all Buddhist doctrines into nine 
different approaches or Vehicles. They are : (1) the Sravakayana, (2) the Pratyekayana, (3) the Bodhisattvayana, (4) the Kriyatantra, (5) the Caryatantra, (6) the 
Yogatantra, (7) the Mahayoga, (8) the Anuyoga, and (9) the Adiyoga. The first 
three belong to the exoteric (Siitra) doctrine, and the last six to the esoteric (Tantric) doctrine. (The 7th, 8th, and 9th are subdivisions of the Anuttara Tantra.) 
The new schools of Tibetan Buddhism, i.e., Ghagyuba, Sajyaba, and Geluba do not 
follow these classifications. It is interesting to note that Milarepa, a founder and 
follower of Ghagyuba tradition, used the Ningmaba terminology on this occasion. 
6, 7, 8, 9 The four main types of demons found in Tibetan legends. 
10 Tripitaka: the Buddhist Canon, which consists of three main bodies: Sutra, 
Sastra, and Vinaya. 
11 Great Perfection (T.T.: rDsogs.Pa.Chin.Po.): the Ningmaba version of the 
teaching of Mahamudrii. 
12 The Four Immeasurables, or the Four Infinite Thoughts: friendliness, compas~ion, sympathetic joy, and evenmindedness. 
13 Two Preparations (T.T.: Tsogs.Lam.g~is.): This refers to the preliminary 
and advanced stages of preparation in the Bodhisattva's spiritual development. 
l4 The Two Hindrances: the Hindrance of Passions and the Hindrance of 
Knowledge. Perfect Buddhahood is achieved through the complete annihilation of 
these two hindrances. 
15 T.T.: Krab-Krab, a term probably denoting cartilage. 
16 The Four Initiations: See Story 1, Note 7, and Story 17, Note 37. 
17 The Five Gates: the five senses and sense organs. 

--- PAGE 279 ---
CHALLENGE FROM 
A CLEVER MAIDEN 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W
HEN Milarepa and his heart-son-disciple Rechungpa were begging 
alms and helping sentient beings at the place of the Five Small 
Lakes in the Dritsam region, their reputation ran high. People said, 
"Look! The Jetsun Milarepa and his son Rechungpa are now meditating 
at Di Se Snow Mountain and Ma Pam Lake!" Influenced by their great 
fame, all the people of Joro Dritsam were convinced that Milarepa and 
Rechungpa were truly marvelous and unusual yogis. As their respect 
and admiration grew, they said, "Let us go to visit these two acomplished yogis!" 
So one day, a number of patrons came to see the Jetsun, and brought 
with them provisions and oblations. Among them was a young girl called 
Rechungma, who was intelligent, compassionate, and had great faith in 
the Dharma. Actually, she was a I)akini who had incarnated in human 
form. Having heard the life-story of Milarepa, the faith of this well-gifted 
girl was confirmed, and she came today with four young girl friends to 
visit him. But in order to test, and thus verify the reputation of the Jetsun and his son, she and her friends challenged Milarepa by singing this 
song: 
We take refuge in the Three Precious Ones; 
Pray, bless us with your great compassion. 
Oh, you two exalted Repa Yogis, 
You have a great reputation from afar! 
Oh, ye faithful here assembled, 
Please be silent now and listen to our song. 
We five young girls from good families, 
--- PAGE 280 ---
Now sing for you our offering; 
Please judge our words and ponder on our parables. 
For you two Repas, this our song is sung! 
The fame of Di Se Snow Mountain is great 
When one sees it not, but hears much of it. 
People say, "Look, the snow of Di Se 
Is like a crystal stiipa." 
But when one comes near and sees it clearly, 
Nothing great or wonderful is found. 
The top of Di Se is wrapped in drifts 
Of snow, its body is snow-clad. 
In this we see nothing great or wonderful, 
Except that these mountains round about 
Are rather nice and charming. 
The fame of Lake Ma Pam is great 
When one sees it not, but hears much of it. 
People say, "Look! Lake Ma Pam 
Is like a Mal)Q.ala of greenish gems!" 
But when one nears it and sees it clearly, 
Nothing great or wonderful can be seen. 
'Tis but a lake filled by the rain, 
A place where water trickles. 
Encircling it are rocks and meadows. 
In this we see nothing great or wonderful. 
Great is the fame of the height of Red-Rock 
When one hears about it from far away. 
People say, "This rock is like a precious jewel!" 
But when one comes near and sees it clearly, 
It is but a great stone jutting out. 
Upon it bushes and trees are growing, 
And round it brooks and small streams flow; 
In it there is nothing great or wonderful. 
You, the elder and the younger Repa, 
Have a fame that spreads to far-off places; 
From far away we have heard much of you. 
People say, "They are indeed accomplished beings!" 

--- PAGE 281 ---
Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
But when one comes near and scans you closely, 
One sees an old man and a callow youth 
Who chant, and hum, and sing together, 
Exhibiting their bodies, nude and shameless. 
He sees two common people wearing cotton, 
Two beggars who eat the food of alms; 
He sees two unscrupulous rascals 
Who roam unrestrained at large. 
There is nothing wonderful or good about you; 
There is nothing great that we can find. 
To us sisters who have wandered everywhere, 
Our morning's pilgrimage has wasted time. 
To us sisters who have traveled the world over, 
Our morning's journey is meaningless; 
The trip was never worth sore feet. 
To us sisters who in this world have seen everything, 
To see an old and young man like you two, is a 
waste of time. 
To us sisters who have heard all things in this world, 
The claims of your good name are but empty clamor. 
You two, either a pair of Buddhist puppets, 
Or devil-possessed agents, 
Will cause but evil hindrances. 
If you understand what we are singing, 
You may answer us with verses. 
If you cannot understand, you may 
Get up and go, for we do not want you! 
Thus they sang. The Jetsun said, "Oh Rechungpa, the three lakes of 
the Snow Mountain were prophesied by the Buddha Himself to be a 
superb place for devotion. If we do not answer those who disparage them, 
not only will these slanderers be damned, but also the merits of such 
holy places will be misconstrued. We yogis who act candidly with our 
bodies, mouths, and minds, should also answer the slanders made 
against us. Thus, not only will the merits and rightness of yogic action 
be illustrated, but the slanderers will also be corrected. Now, Rechungpa, sing in chorus with your father for these young women!" 

--- PAGE 282 ---
Oh, faithful patrons here assembled, 
And you young people who love to chant and sing, 
Especially you five loquacious maidens, 
Listen to this reply, the song that I shall sing. 
Know ye who we are? 
We are the older and younger Repas. 
I, the old man on the right side singing, 
Am the Yogi Milarepa; 
He, the young man chanting on the left, 
Is Dor Draug Rechung. 
With a good tune and words of meaning, 
I sing to you my patrons here assembled, 
The song which flows from my enlightened spirit. 
Think, as you hear it, and listen mindfully. 
The fame of Di Se Snow Mountain is far-spreading; 
People say of it in distant places, 
"Di Se is a crystal-like pagoda!" 
When one approaches closer, 
One sees the summit is snow-covered. 
The prophecy of Buddha says [most truly], 
That this snow mountain is the navel of the world, 
A place where the snow leopards dance. 
The mountain top, the crystal-like pagoda, 
Is the [white and glistening] palace of Dem-Chog. 
The great snow mountains which Di Se encircle, 
Are the dwelling places of five-hundred Arhats.1 
Here all deities of the Eight Divisions pay their 
homage! 
Surrounding it are hills and marshes. 
The region abounds with "incense" plants, 
The source of nectar-producing drugs. 
This is the great place of accomplished yogis; 
Here one attains transcendental Samadhis. 
There is no place more wonderful than this, 
There is no place more marvelous than here. 
The fame of Ma Pam Lake is indeed far-spreading; 
People say of it in distant places, 

--- PAGE 283 ---
Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
"Ma Pam Lake is like a green-gemmed Ma~:tc;lala!" 
\Vhen one approaches closer, 
One sees there waters [cold and] plentiful. 
As prophesied by the Buddha in past ages, 
This lake is called "The Lake-That's-NcverWarm,"2 
The fountainhead of four great rivers, 
A place where fish and otters swim. 
Because it is the Eight Nr1gas' dwelling, 
It appears to be a l\la1)~lala made of gems. 
The water falling in it from the heavens 
Is like a stream of milk, a rain of nectar; 
It is the Hundred Dcvas' bathing place, 
The water with eight merits. 
The lovely plains and rocks this lake encircling, 
Arc treasuries of the lesser Nagas. 
Here grows superb Tsanbudrisha wood. 
The Southern Continent, Tsanbu, 
For this reason has its name. 
There is no place more wonderful than this, 
There is no place more marvelous than here. 
The fame of the height of Red-Rock is far-spreading; 
People say of it in distant places, 
"That huge rock is like a heap of jewels!" 
When one approaches closer, 
One sees a great rock towering above a meadow. 
As prophesied by Buddha in past ages, 
It is the Black Hill, the rock of Bije Mountain Range. 
It is the central place, north of the woodlands 
On the border bet\veen Tibet and India, 
\Vhere Indian tigers freely roam. 
The medicine trees, Tsandan and Zundru, 
Are found here growing wild. 
The rock looks like a heap of glistening jewels; 
It is the palace where live the heavenly saints; 
It is a seat of hermits, blessed by the I)akinis, 
And where accomplished yogis live. 
Here the river all the hill encircles, 
--- PAGE 284 ---
Making [a solitary] place, forbidden. 
There is no place more wonderful than this; 
There is no place more truly marvelous! 
The fame of the elder and younger Repas is farspreading; 
People say of us in distant places, 
"They are truly the accomplished beings!" 
When one approaches closer, 
One sees only an old man and a younger fellow, 
With nothing wonderful about them! 
The plain looks of these two 
Show the complete exhaustion 
Of form-clinging and discriminating thoughts! 
Lying with our bodies riaked, shows 
That we need not clothes of the Two Clingings. 
Heedlessly exposing our male organs proves 
That we have no self-made shameful feelings. 
These little verses flowing from our mouths 
Come from our inner Experience. 
The cotton clothes we wear 
Show blissful inner heat a'burning. 
That we eat left-over food as beggars 
Proves our abnegation of desires and pleasures, 
Shows our spirit, unconcerned and fearless. 
Thus we live with our six senses in a 
Way most natural and ingenuous! 
I am the Guru of the faithful and well-gifted, 
The source whence their Pith-Instructions came. 
I am the symbol to which patrons pay their homage, 
The exemplar of all the saints and sages. 
To me, great yogis tell their understandings; 
Through me, wrong views may be eliminated. 
I am the source from which Truth is illumined -
The one who has realized the Law of Non-existence. 
I am the one whose mind remains [in peace], 
Who leads others on the Path's Experiences. 

--- PAGE 285 ---
Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
I am the one who realized himself as Dharmakaya, 
Who with compassion works for others. 
There is nothing else more wonderful than this; 
There is no one else more marvelous than I. 
Young lady visitors, 
You have pilgrimaged to every land, 
But your journeys were but toil and drudgery. 
If you want to make a pilgrimage of value, 
Travel to the holy Shrine of Paugba Wadi.3 
It may be true that you have journeyed everywhere, 
But all of this was waste of time, 
And made you feel footsore and weary. 
If you want to make a [worthwhile] journey 
Visit holy Bodhgaya! 
There may be no place that you have not visited, 
But they are all of little meaning. 
If you want to make a [real] pilgrimage, 
Visit Lhasa Chrunon Temple!4 
There may be nothing of which you have not heard, 
Yet all that has been without significance. 
If you want something truly meaningful 
Listen to the Pith-Instructions of the Oral 
Lineage. 
You may have relied on many people, 
Yet they were but your kinsfolk. 
If you seek a person on whom you can rely, 
Find a capable Guru! 
You may have done all things, everywhere, 
But most of them were deeds of Karma. 
If you want your deeds to be truly worthy, 
You should practice the teaching of the holy Dharma. 
This is the old man's answer to you maidens; 
If you can understand it, these are the real teachings. 
Otherwise you may regard it as a common song. 
The time has now come for you to leave. 
We are the yogis who do whate'er we willYou visitors may go and do the same! 
--- PAGE 286 ---
THE IIUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
Rechungma, who was the leader of the girls, and who stood in the 
center, was thereupon confirmed in her great faith. As tears rolled down 
her cheeks, she untied the jade from her belt and took off the jeweled 
ornaments from her head. Prostrating herself before Milarepa she cried: 
"We five girls all sincerely ask you to grant us the teaching of Dharma. 
Also we beg that you give us the profound Pith-Instructions, for we have 
now made up our minds to meditate in a hermitage." And she sang prayerfully: 
As one light is kindled from another, 
The teaching has been transmitted down 
From Dharmakaya, the great Dorje-Chang. 
The [holders] of this great Succession 
Are compassionate and enlightened; 
Are they not the great Tilopa and Naropa? 
He who journeyed to India with such hardship, 
Was he not great Marpa the Translator? 
He who underwent such trials for his teacher, Marpa, 
Is he not the great and faithful Milarepa? 
His naked body is full of splendor, 
His speech rich and melodious, 
His loving mind shines forth with radiant light. 
I bow down to the body, speech, and mind of my 
Father Repa. 
We five girls who have come to this meeting, 
Must have had small merit in our previous lives. 
We have attained human bodies, but are lowly born; 
We haven<;> self-control in practicing the Dharma. 
To-day, because of your blessing, most precious Jetsun, 
Deep faith from our hearts up-wells. 
This precious jade upon my belt, 
And the jeweled headdress, 
I now untie, and offer to you. 
Pray grant us Buddha's teaching, 
Pray tell us your life-story! 
Milarepa replied, "I have no use for your gems and ornaments. If 
you sincerely intend to practice Dharma, there are many better and wiser 
Gurus than I. Go and ask the Dharma from them. I am a person who 
pays no heed to clothes and food, and always dwells in no-man's land. 

--- PAGE 287 ---
Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
You could not follow my way of living, and it is doubtful whether you 
would be able to endure want of food and clothing. Please, then, listen 
to my song": 
The Marvelous One, who underwent 
Such hardships for Naropa, 
The one blessed by the great Tilopa and Dorje-Chang, 
Is he not the Father Translator who speaks two tongues, 
The Father Translator, Guru Marpa? 
I am Milarepa blessed by His mercy. 
My father was Mila Shirah Jhantsan, 
My mother Nyantsa Karjan, 
And I was called Tubhaga ["Delightful-to-Hear"]. 
Because our merits and virtues were of small account, 
And the Cause-Effect Karma of the past spares no one, 
My father Mila passed away [too early in his life]. 
The deceiving goods and belongings of our household 
Were plundered by my aunt and uncle, 
Whom I and my mother had to serve. 
They gave us food fit only for dogs; 
The cold wind pierced our ragged clothing; 
Our skin froze and our bodies were benumbed. 
Often was I beaten by my uncle, 
And endured his cruel punishment. 
Hard was it to avoid my aunt's ill temper. 
I lived as best I could, a lowly servant, 
And shrugged my shoulders [in bitter resignation]. 
Misfortunes descended one after the other; 
We suffered so our hearts despaired. 
In desperation, I went to Lamas Yundun and Rondunlaga, 
From whom I mastered the magic arts of Tu, Ser, 
and Ded.11 
Witnessed by my aunt and uncle, I brought 
Great disaster on their villagers and kinsmen. 
For which, later, I suffered deep remorse. 
Then I heard the fame of Marpa, the renowned Translator, 
Who, blessed by the saints Naropa and Medripa,• 
Was living in the upper village of South River. 

--- PAGE 288 ---
After a hard journey I arrived there. 
For six years and eight months7 [I stayed] 
With him, my gracious Father Guru, Marpa. 
For him I built many houses, 
One with courtyards and nine stories; 
Only after this did he accept me. 
From him I received the Pointing-out Instruction. 
Thus I truly understood Mahamudra, 
The view of the profound Absolute. 
' 
He also taught me the Six Yogas of Naropa, 
The final teaching of the Path of Means.8 
I was ripened through the Four Initiations, 
And obtained a true, decisive understanding 
Of the great Guru Naropa's teaching. 
Having received the Pith-Instructions from Marpa, 
I renounced all the affairs of this life; 
And, no longer lazy, devoted myself to Dharma. 
Thus have I reached the State of Eternal Bliss. 
Such is the story of my life. 
I wish you five young ladies 
All good fortune and great joy. 
Leave us now and go home. 
Hearing the Jetsun's life story, all the maidens' faith was strengthened 
anew. They begged Milarepa to accept them as his servants. He said, 
"You are spoiled girls from rich families, and if you come with me, you 
will never be able to endure the hardships of my life. If you want to 
practice the Dharma, you should live ascetically, as I do. But I doubt if you 
can." Then he sang a song called "The Self-Examination": 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa, the Translator. 
If you, the five young sisters, 
Really want to practice Dharma 
And insist on coming with me, 
Think this song over carefully 
And obtain the answer for yourselves. 
You should ask yourselves: "Have I 

--- PAGE 289 ---
Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
The persistence to endure the hardships 
Of the ascetic life? 
Have I a will strong and dominant enough 
To renounce all Sa111saric desires, 
And follow the instructions of my Guru?" 
Though you leave your native land, 
The prison of all evils, 
Can you persevere alone in rugged places? 
Though you renounce your kinsmen, the noose of devils, 
And realize their detriments, 
Can you depend upon a qualified Guru? 
Though you realize that properties and goods 
Are poisonous, the enticing bait of demons, 
Can you live in destitution and endure hardship? 
Though you forsake soft woolen clothes from W eu, 
Can you produce the warm and blissful Dumo 
[Inner-Heat]? 
If you renounce a city life 
And forsake your friends and lovers, 
Can you live alone in no-man's land? 
Though you disavow the Eight Desires, 
Can you live in a humble and lowly way? 
Though you understand the transiency of this life, 
Do you realize the precariousness of [all] life? 
This is the tradition of the Ghagya Lama, 
The way of Practice in our Lineage. 
You may come with me if you can answer "Yea." 
I shall then give you the Tantric teaching 
And the Pith-Instruction of the Skillful Path. 
Then shall I bless you and grant you the Initiations. 
Having heard this song, the girls all became very happy. Their leader, 
Rechungma, said, "Though we were born in a female form, which is 
considered to be inferior, nevertheless, so far as the Alaya [Store)Consciousness is concerned, there is no discrimination between man and 

--- PAGE 290 ---
woman. We are convinced of the faults of Saf!1Sara, and shall try to follow our Guru's instructions. But, in view of our inability to practice the 
Dharma in a perfect way, we beg you to accept us as your servants. No 
matter whether we have, or have not, the ability to practice the Dharma, 
please do not forsake us!" Then in song she expressed her confidence in 
being able to practice the Jetsun's teachings, and besought him to accept 
her as his servant: 
Father, Qualified Guru, Precious One, 
Your naked body is full of splendor! 
I bow down at your feet, Jetsun Repa, 
Through ascetic practice you help all sentient beings! 
We five sisters who come to this assembly, 
May have a lower body-form as women, 
But in the Bodhi-Mind, there is neither man nor woman! 
Thinking of the defects of Saf!1sara, please allow 
Us to practice austerities and follow your instruction! 
Let us leave our country, the prison of demons, 
And remain forever in a hermitage! 
Let us leave for good our relatives, the troublemakers, 
And rely solely upon our Guru! 
Property and possessions are the lure of devils. 
Let us fore'er renounce them and practice austerity! 
Let us give up fine woolen clothes from W eu, 
And kindle the blissful, wondrous Inner Heat! 
Let us leave our native land and lovers 
And remain in no-man's land. 
Let us each act humbly with our body, speech, and mind; 
Let us depart from the Eight Worldly Claims and realize 
That all is transitory. 
Let us remember the uncertainty of coming death! 
Let us follow the instructions of our Lama. 
Oh, most perfect Guru, most precious one! 
Please be kind and grant to us the Dharma, 
Please accept us, the five sisters, as your servants! 
Milarepa realized that they were well-destined disciples, and so accepted them. 

--- PAGE 291 ---
Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
At that time, Milarepa and his son-disciples were still dwelling at the 
Five Small Lakes. There he imparted the Initiations and Pith-Instructions 
to the five girls, and set them to meditating. Rechungma attained the 
warm and blissful experiences and other merits of Dumo within three 
days. 
Later Rechungma became ill. In order to test her perseverance in remaining in solitude, Milarepa told her that she might go wherever she 
liked. But the girl replied, "Although I am ill, I will stay in the hermitage," thus proving that she had the persistence to endure misfortunes. 
One day, Rechungma went to see Milarepa when he was sojourning 
elsewhere, and met him in a great assembly. In order to test her faith 
and see whether she had full confidence in him, he sang before the assembly a song with two meanings: 
I pray to all the holy Gurus, 
I take refuge in the Patron Buddha. 
Listen, faithful patrons, 
If you cannot renounce the Eighty Worldly Desires, 
Never say that you are men with faith; 
Your faith may so be lost when adverse conditions come. 
If you do not avoid the Ten Evil Deeds, 
Never call yourselves men of discipline, 
Lest you should fall down to the lower paths. 
If distracted thoughts still haunt your mind, 
Never claim that you observe the Tantric Precepts, 
Lest you should fall into the Vajra Hell.9 
Never criticize the teachings of other Schools 
If you have not made impartial and wide studies, 
Else you will violate the principle of Dharma 
And scorch your own mind badly. 
If you have not realized the illusory nature of 
all beings, 
Never neglect virtuous deeds, and avoid all sinning, 
Lest you should fall into the Three Lower Realms! 
If you do not understand the minds of others, 
Never slander others or condemn their views, 

--- PAGE 292 ---
Lest you be misled by self-conceit and egotism. 
If you have not unified your mind with Dharma-Essence, 
Do not boast of your meditation experiences, 
Lest devils interrupt your progress. 
If you have not reached the state of beyond-talking, 
Do not boast of your great understanding, 
Lest you be left in a pitiable positionLonging for, but ne'er obtaining the tantalizing Fruit. 
If you have not reached the realm of spontaneous 
action, 
Do not do what you will or neglect your self-control, 
Lest the sling-stone that you throw rebound upon 
your head. 
Through my mouth the Dharma has been preached; 
It should be treasured in your hearts. 
Comprehend it clearly, and bear it in your minds! 
Among the audience [only] Rechungma fully understood the meaning of this song. She rose from the crowd and said to Milarepa: "Regarding the accomplishments of my Guru, his acts and deeds, I have never 
had a single moment of doubt nor the slightest skepticism. Please listen 
to my song," Whereupon, she chanted "The Fifteen Realizations": 
I bow down to all holy Gurus! 
Toward the Jetsun, my Father Guru, 
I have steadfast reverence and faith immutable! 
The Three Precious Ones are but one Entity; 
Amongst [the deities] I cannot discriminate. 
In the Pith-Instructions of the Whispered Lineage 
given by my Guru 
There are no playwords or vain babblings. 
In the practice of the Yidham Yoga, 
Whose essence is the Jetsun, 
There are no periods of time or intervals. 
Things as they manifest are by nature magic-like; 
I do not deem them to be substantial, 
Nor do I cling to them with habitual thoughts! 

--- PAGE 293 ---
Challenge from a Clever Maiden 
In the Mind-Essence, the quintessential "light," 
There is no adulteration by distracting thoughts. 
In the real nature of beings, the realm of Mind, 
There is no subject-otject difilement. 
In the natural state of the Mind-Essence 
There is no ground from which habitual thought may 
rise. 
The nature of the mind is Dharmakaya; 
It is not defiled by forms 
And from attributes is free. 
Our bodies are the meeting-place of the Four Diseases, 
And so we should not quarrel with our friends. 
Devils and misfortunes should be used to help in 
our devotions; 
There is no need to seek imaginary divinations. 
Dreams are delusory emanations of habitual thoughts; 
One should not deem them to be true or cling to them. 
Forgive the foe, who is your real teacher, 
For you should never cherish vengeful thoughts. 
Toward the behavior of an accomplished being 
Do not raise doubts and criticism. 
Self-manifestation is the Buddha, the One originally 
existing; 
So do not seek the Accomplished One in other places. 
My holy Guru, gracious teacher, 
Pray always bless all capable disciples, 
[Bathing them ever] in the stream of love and grace! 
Pr~y, always remember me, this ignorant disciple! 
Pray embrace me ever with your great compassion! 
Milarepa was very pleased; he decided that Rechungma was a qualified female yogi, fitted to be a companion in [Tantric devotion]. And so 
he imparted to her all the Pith-Instructions without reservation. 
Then he said to Rechungpa, "You are very good at teaching the disciples. You should take care of this girl." And he handed her over to Rechungpa, who for a time took her as a companion in devotion. Thereafter, 

--- PAGE 294 ---
she went to meditate at Semodo of Namtsoshumo in the North, observing absolute silence for eight years. Eventually she gained the Ten Experiences and Eight Merits, and perfected all spiritual Purifications and Realizations of the Path; and in this life she went to the Pure Land of the 
l)akinis. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting Rechungma, one of his four 
(foremost] female disciples, at Five Small Lakes of Joro Dritsam. 
NOTES 
1 Arhat: an (enlightened) being who has forever annihilated all desires and 
passions; the name for the enlightened being of the Hinayana Path. 
2 The Lake-That's-Never-Warm (T.T.: mTso.Ma.Dros.Pa.): "The Lake of Ma 
Pam, in Nari. The Hindus describe it as something like the northern ocean, in· 
habited by Nagas, and Tibetans in good faith repeat such legends, at least in their 
literature, although they know better. This lake has a reputation of being ex· 
tremely cold all the year round." (Quoted from Jaschke's Dictionary.) 
3 Paugba Wadi: a sanctuary in Nepal containing the image of a Buddha 
called Wadi-zunpo, the good or holy Wadi. 
4 Lhasa Chrunon: a famous temple built by King Sron.bTsan.sGam.Po. 
5 Tu, Ser, and Ded (T.T.: mThu., Ser., [and] gTad.): three different arts of 
black magic. 
6 Medripa (Skt.: MaitrPa). 
7 According to the general belief among Tibetan Lamas, Milarepa apparently 
stayed with Marpa, his Guru, for much longer than six years and eight months as 
this text suggests. It is possible that some mistake has slipped in here. 
8 Path of Means: Sec the translator's comments in the Appendix; see also 
Story 7, Note 7, and Story 5, Notes 18 and 19. 
9 Vajra Hell: the horrible hell to which the 
prec~pt-violator of Tantrism 
goes. 

--- PAGE 295 ---
Obeisance to all Gurus 
THE HUNTSMAN 
AND THE DEER 
H
,\VING directed his disciple to remain at different hermitages for 
their devotions, Jetsun Milarepa went to a secluded place at Nyi 
Shang Gur Da Mountain on the border between Nepal and Tibet. The 
upper slopes were very rugged, cloudy, foggy, and continuously deluged 
with rain. To the right of the mountain towered a precipitous hill where 
one could always hear the cries of wild animals and watch vultures hovering above. To its left stood a hill clothed with soft, luxuriant meadows, where deer and antelopes played. Below there was a luxurious forest with all kinds of trees and flowers and within which lived many 
monkeys, peacocks, turkeys, and other beautiful birds. The monkeys 
amused themselves by swinging and leaping among the trees, the birds 
darted here and there with a great display of wing, while warblers 
chirped and sang. In front of the hermitage flowed a stream, fed by 
melting snow and filled with rocks and boulders. A fresh, clear, bubbling sound could always be heard as one passed by. 
This hermitage was called Ghadaya. It was a very quiet and delightful 
place with every favorable condition for devotees. And so it was here that 
Jetsun Milarepa indulged in the River-Flow Samadhi, while all the benevolent local deities rendered him services and oblations. 
One day, Milarepa heard a dog barking [in the distance], after 
that a great noise arose. He thought, "Hitherto, this place has been 
very favorable for meditation. Is some disturbance on the way?" So he 
left the cave, came to a huge rock, and sat upon it absorbed in the Compassion of Non-discrimination.1 Before long, a black, many-spotted deer 
ran up, badly frightened. Seeing this, an unbearable compassion arose 
within the Jetsun. He thought, "It is because of the evil Karmas this deer 
has acquired in the past that he was born in such a pitiable form. Though 
--- PAGE 296 ---
he has not committed any sinful deeds in this life, he must still undergo 
great suffering. What a pity! I shall preach to him the Dharma of Mahayana, and lead him to eternal bliss." Thinking thus, he sang to the 
deer: 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa; 
Pray, relieve the sufferings of all beings! 
Listen to me, you deer with sharp antlers! 
Because you want to escape 
From something in the outer world, 
You have no chance to free ypurself 
From inner blindness and delusions. 
With no regret or sadness 
Forget your mind and outer body -
The time has come for you 
To renounce all blindness and delusion. 
The Ripening Karma is fearful and compelling, 
But how can you escape from it 
By fleeing with your delusory body? 
If escape is what you want, 
Hide within Mind-Essence; 
If you want to run away, 
Flee to the place of Bodhi. 
There is no other place of safe refuge. 
Uprooting all confusion from your mind, 
Stay with me here in rest and quiet. 
At this very moment the fear of death is full upon you; 
You are thinking, "Safety lies on the far side 
of the hill; 
If I stay here I shall be caught!" 
This fear and hope is why you wander in Saq1sara. 
I shall now teach you the Six Yogas of Naropa, 
And set you to practicing the Mahamudra. 
Thus he sang in a tuneful voice like that of the God Brahma. Had 
there been .anyone to hear, he could not have helped feeling charmed 
and delighted. 

--- PAGE 297 ---
The Huntsman and the Deer 
Affected by the Jetsun's compassion, the deer was relieved from its 
painful fear of capture. With tears streaming from its eyes, it came near 
to Milarepa, licked his clothes, and then lay down at his left side. He 
thought, "This deer must be hunted by a ferocious dog, the one whose 
barking I heard just now." 
As Milarepa was wondering what kind of a dog it could be, a red bitch 
with a black tail and a collar round her neck, ran toward him. She was a 
hunting dog- such a savage and fearful creature that her tongue was 
hanging out like a blazing ribbon, while the sharp claws on her feet could 
rend any prey, and her threatening growl was like thunder. Milarepa 
thought, "It must be this bitch that has been chasing the deer. She is 
indeed ferocious. Full of anger she regards whatever she sees as her enemy. It would be good if I could calm her and quench her hatred." Great 
pity for the bitch rose in him and he sang with great compassion: 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa; 
I pray you, pacify the hate of all beings. 
Oh you bitch with a wolf's face, 
Listen to this song of Milarepal 
Whatever you see, you deem it to be your foe; 
Your heart is full of hatred and ill thoughts. 
Because of your bad Karma you were born a bitch, 
Ever suffering from hunger, and agonized by passion. 
If you do not try to catch the Self-mind within, 
What good is it to catch prey outside? 
The time has come for you to capture your Self-mind; 
Now is the time to renounce your fury, 
And with me sit here restfully. 
Your mind is full of greed and anger, 
Thinking, "If I go that way, I shall lose him, 
But I will catch him if I go forward on this side." 
This hope and fear is why you wander in Saq1sara! 
I shall now teach you the Six Y ogas of Naropa, 
And set you to practicing the Mahamudra. 
Hearing this song of Dharma, sung in a heavenly voice and with immense compassion, the bitch was greatly moved and her fury subsided. 
She then made signs to the Jetsun by whining, wagging her tail, and 

--- PAGE 298 ---
licking his clothes. Then she put her muzzle under her two front paws 
and prostrated herself before him. Tears fell from her eyes, and she lay 
down peacefully with the deer. 
Milarepa thought, "There must be a sinful person who is following 
these two animals. He will probably be here any moment." Before long 
a man appeared looking very proud and violent; from under his lashes 
his eyes glared fiercely, his hair was knotted on the top of his head, and 
his long sleeves flapped from side to side as he ran toward the Jetsun. In 
one hand he held a bow and arrow, and in the other a long lasso for 
catching game. As he dashed up, one could hear his breath coming in 
suffocating gasps and see streams of sweat pouring down his face and 
almost choking him to death. When he saw the Jetsun with the bitch 
and deer lying beside him, like a mother with her sons, he thought, "Are 
the deer and my bitch both bewitched by this yogi?" He then cried angrily 
to Milarepa, "You fat, greasy repas and yogis! I see you here, there, and 
everywhere! High in the mountain snows you come to kill game; low on 
lake-shores you come to hook fish; on the plains you visit towns to trade 
in dogs and fight with people. It does not matter if one or two like you 
die. You may have the power of keeping my bitch and my deer, but now 
see whether your clothes can also keep out my arrow." So saying, the 
hunter drew his long bow, aimed at Milarepa, and shot. But the arrow 
went high and missed. The Jctsun thought, "If even ignorant animals 
understand my preaching, he should be able to understand it too, for 
after all he is a man." 
So he said: "You need not hurry to shoot me, as you will have plenty 
of time to do so later. Take your time, and listen to my song." Whereupon, in a tuneful voice like that of the Cod Brahma, the Jetsun sang to 
the hunter, whose name was Chirawa Cwunbo Dorje: 
I pray to all accomplished beings; 
I pray you to extinguish the Five Poisonous Kle~as. 
You man with a human body but a demon's face, 
Listen to me. Listen to the song of Milarepa! 
Men say the human body is most precious, like a gem; 
There is nothing that is precious about you. 
You sinful man with a demon's look, 
Though you desire the pleasures of this life, 
Because of your sins, you will never gain them. 
But if you renounce desires within, 
You will win the Great Accomplishment. 

--- PAGE 299 ---
The Huntsman and the Deer 
It is difficult to conquer oneself 
While vanquishing the outer world; 
Conquer now your own Self-mind. 
To slay this deer will never please you, 
But if you kill the Five Poisons within, 
All your wishes will be fulfilled. 
If one tries to vanquish foes in the outer world, 
They increase in greater measure. 
If one conquers his Self-mind within, 
All his foes soon disappear. 
Do not spend your life committing sinful deeds; 
It is good for you to practice holy Dharma. 
I shall now teach you the Six Yogas of Naropa, 
And set you to practicing the Mahamudra. 
While the Jetsun was singing this, the hunter waited and listened. He 
thought, "There is nothing to prove that what this yogi has just said is 
true. Usually, a deer is very frightened, and my bitch very wild and savage. Today, however, they lie peacefully together, one on his left and the 
other on his right, like a mother with her sons. Hitherto I have never 
missed a shot during my winter hunting in the snow mountains, but today I could not hit him. He must be a black magician, or a very great 
and unusual Lama. I will find out how he lives." 
Thinking thus, the hunter entered the cave, where he found nothing 
but some inedible herbs; [seeing such evidence of austerity], a great 
faith suddenly arose within him. He said, "Revered Lama, who is your 
Guru and what teachings do you practice? Where did you come from? 
Who is your companion, and what do you own? If I am acceptable to 
you, I should like to be your servant; also I will offer you the life of this 
deer." 
Milarepa replied, "I shall tell you of my companion, from whence I 
come, and how I live. If you can follow my way of life, you may come 
with me." And he sang to Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje: 
The Lamas, Tilopa, Naropa, and MarpaThese three are my Gurus; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The Guru, the Yidham,2 and the :OakiniTo these three Mila pays his homage; 

--- PAGE 300 ---
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha -
These three are l\'lila's refuge; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The View, the Practice, and the Action 
These three are the Dharmas Mila practices; 
If you can absorb these teachings, 
You may come with me. 
The snow, the rocks, and the clay mountainsThese three are where Mila meditates; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The deer, the argali, and the antelopeThese three are Mila's cattle; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The lynx, the wild dog, and the wolf -
These three are 1\ilila's watchdogs; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The grouse, the vulture, and the singing JolmoThese three are Mila's poultry; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The sun, the moon, and the stars -
These three are Mila's pictures; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The gods, the ghosts, and the sages -
These three are Mila's neighbors; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 

--- PAGE 301 ---
The Huntsman and the Deer 
The hyena, the ape, and the monkey -
These three are Mila's playmates; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
Bliss, Illumination, and Non·thoughtThese three are my companions; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
Porridge, roots, and nettles -
These three are Mila's food; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
Water from snow, and spring, and brookThese three are Mila's drink; 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The NaQ.is, Breaths, and BindusThese three are Mila's clothing: 
If you they satisfy, 
You may come with me. 
The hunter thought, "His words, thoughts, and actions are truly consistent." The uttermost faith thus arose within him. He shed many tears 
and bowed down at Mila's feet, crying, "Oh precious Jetsunl I now offer 
you my deer, my bitch, my bow and arrows, and my lasso. I and my bitch 
have committed many sins. I pray you to free my bitch, Red Lightning 
Lady, thus delivering her to the higher Realms; and [I pray you] to bring 
this black deer to the Path of Great Happiness. I pray you grant me, the 
huntsman Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje, the teaching of the Dharma and 
lead me to the Path of Liberation." Then he sang: 
Sitting on my right side is the deer 
With horns as white as snow. 
The markings round his mouth are his adornment. 
If I slay him, my ravenous appetite 
For seven days might be satisfied. 
Now I do not need him and offer him to you. 
Pray deliver this black deer to the Path of 
Great Happiness, 

--- PAGE 302 ---
Pray lead Red Lightning Lady to the Path of Bodhi, 
Pray bring me, Gwunbo Dorje, to the Land of Liberation. 
This black rope with its metal ring 
Is fit to bind wild yaks on Great North Plain; 
Now I do not need it and offer it to you. 
Pray deliver this black deer to the Path of Great 
Happiness, 
Pray lead Red Lightning Lady to the Path of Bodhi, 
Pray bring me, Gwunbo Dorje, to the Land of Liberation. 
To wear this goat-skin with spotted pattern 
Will keep one warm, however high the mountain; 
Now I do not need it and offer it to you. 
Pray deliver this black deer to the Path of 
Great Happiness, 
Pray lead Red Lighning Lady to the Path of Bodhi, 
Pray bring me, Gwunbo Dorje, to the Land of Liberation. 
In my right hand I hold arrows, 
Each shaft adorned with feathers four; 
When I shoot them with a "Phei!", 
They always hit the target; 
Now I do not need them and offer them to you. 
Pray deliver this black deer to the Path of 
Great Happiness, 
Pray lead Red Lightning Lady to the Path of Bodhi, 
Pray bring me, Gwunbo Dorje, to the Land of Liberation. 
This superb white bow in my left hand 
With white bark (of birch] is decked; 
When you bend it, e'en the dragon 
In the sky will roar [with fear]; 
Now I do not need it and offer it to you. 
Pray deliver this black deer to the Path of 
Great Happiness, 
Pray lead Red Lightning Lady to the Path of Bodhi, 
Pray bring me, Gwunbo Dorje, to the Land of Liberation. 
In this manner Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje, the huntsman, offered the 
deer, his bitch, and all his belongings to Milarepa. He then said, "Oh 
Lama! Please accept me as your servant. I will go home to get provisions 
from my children and then return. Do you intend to remain here? Please 

--- PAGE 303 ---
The Huntsman and the Deer 
tell me clearly, where are you going to stay?" The Jetsun, very pleased 
with his offering of the deer and with his change of heart towards the 
Dharma, then said, "Huntsman, it is very wonderful that you have determined to renounce your sinful activities and perform virtuous deeds. 
But it will be difficult for you to rely on me completely. Though you may 
have confidence in me, it will be difficult for you to find me, because I 
have no permanent residence. Nevertheless, if you want to practice the 
Dharma, you should cut off all attachment to your family and follow my 
example at once. I will tell you why I have no definite dwelling place, 
so listen to my song": 
I, the strange Repa in my hermitage, 
For three months in the summer 
Meditate on the Snow Mountain. 
That refreshes body, mind, and inspiration. 
For three months in the autumn I go out for almsBegging grain for sustenance. 
For three months in the winter 
I rnedi tate in forests, 
And so am free from bad and untamed PraQas. 
For three months in the spring 
I haunt meadows, hills, and brooks, 
Keeping in good health my lungs and gall. 
In all seasons of the year, 
I meditate without distraction. 
Our bodies, formed from the Four Elements, 
Are subject to affliction and decay. 
Ever must one watch and meditate; 
This is the only way to conquer the Five Klesas! 
I eat whatever food is there; 
This is the way to be content, 
To quench desires and their consequences. 
The sign of the great diligence of yogis 
Is their constant practice of the Dharma. 
The huntsman then said: "A Lama like you is indeed marvelous and 
unique. From the bottom of my heart I want to practice the Dharma. 
I am going horne to say a few words to my family and also to get some 
provisions with which to sustain my devotion. I will soon be back. Please 
remain here until then." 
The Jetsun replied, "If you really want to practice the Dharma, there is 

--- PAGE 304 ---
no need to see your family. Following the ascetic way of practice, one 
does not have to look for provisions for his devotion, because he can live 
on fruits and vegetables. No one can be sure when death will come. Besides, your present meritorious thought and earnestness may change, so 
it is better to stay here. Listen to me before you talk with your family." 
And Milarepa sang: 
Hearken, hearken, huntsman! 
Though the thunder crashes, 
It is but empty sound; 
Though the rainbow is richly colored, 
It soon will fade away. 
The pleasures of this world are like dream-visions; 
Though one enjoy them, they are the source of sin. 
Though all we see may seem to be eternal, 
It soon will fall to pieces and will disappear. 
Yesterday perhaps one had enough or more, 
Today it is all gone and nothing's left; 
Last year one was alive, this year one dies. 
Good food turns out to be poisonous, 
And the beloved companion turns into a foe. 
Harsh words and complaints requite 
Good will and gratitude. 
Your sins hurt no one but yourself. 
Among one hundred heads, you value most your own. 
In all ten fingers, if one's cut, you feel the pain. 
Among all things you value, yourself is valued most. 
The time has come for you to help yourself. 
Life flees fast. Soon death 
Will knock upon your door. 
It is foolish, therefore, one's devotion to postpone. 
What else can loving kinsmen do 
But throw one into Sa111sara? 
To strive for happiness hereafter 
Is more important than to seek it now. 
The time has come for you to rely on a Guru, 
The time has come to practice Dharma. 
Hearing this song, Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje was completely converted 
to the Dharma. He then remained with Milarepa and did not return 

--- PAGE 305 ---
The Huntsman and the Deer 
home. After meditating for some time, he had several experiences, which 
he told Milarepa, and then asked for further instruction. Milarepa was 
very pleased, and said, "You have already begun to produce merits 
[within you], so you should follow these instructions": 
To rely on a Guru, 
One should pray to him often and sincerely. 
When one practices the devotion of the Yidham and 
Oakini, 
Clearly and often should he meditate on the Arising 
Yoga. 
When one meditates on transiency and the approach 
of death, 
He should e'er remember 
That death cannot be predicted or avoided. 
When one practices Mahiimudrii, 
He should cultivate it step by step. 
When one meditates on parent-like sentient beings8 
He should e'er remember to repay his gratitude to them. 
When one meditates on the deep teaching of the 
Whispered Lineage, 
He should persevere with great determination. 
When one reaches the consummation of Dharma, 
He should avoid ups-and-downs and make it stable. 
When one examines his devotions 
To see if they agree with Dharma, 
He should not waver nor be fickle, 
But should bring them to one-pointedness. 
When one cultivates the holy Dharma, 
He should renounce the world. 
When food is offered by the deities, 
One does not need to find food for himself. 
If like a miser one is ever hoarding goods, 
He never can succeed in gaining more; 
This is witnessed in the oath of all I)akinis, 
Hence you should abandon worldly play. 
Thereupon, the Jetsun gave to Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje the complete 
Initation and Pith-Instructions. Through practicing them, the huntsman 
eventually became one of the heart-sons of Milarepa and was known as 

--- PAGE 306 ---
Chira Repa- The Cotton-clad Huntsman. The deer and the bitch were 
also forever removed from the Paths of Sorrow. It is said that the bow 
and the arrows which the huntsman offered to the Jetsun are still in that 
cave. 
This is the story of l\Iilarepa meeting his heart-son, Chira Repa, at 
Nyi Shang Cur Da. 
NOTES 
1 Compassion of Non-discrimination or Non-discernment (T.T.: dMigs.Pa. 
Mei.Pahi.sl"'yiiu)e.), is a spontaneous, non-discriminating, and infinite love embodied in the Uncreated Voidness- the exclusive Compassion of Buddhahood. 
From the human point of view, compassion cannot arise without an object about 
which it is concerned. Compassion or love seems necessarily to be involved in a 
dualistic or subject-object mode. But according to Mahayana Buddhism, the highest 
compassion is one that transcends both subject and object, and is brought forth 
through the realization of Voidness. It is, in essence, identical with the intuitive 
Wisdom-of-Voidness. This is one of the most inscrutible mysteries of Buddhahood. 
2 Yidham: the Patron Buddha of a Tantric Yogi. See Story 7, Note 29. 
3 As sentient beings have been wandering in Saf!lsara throughout beginning· 
less, infinite time, they must all have had parental relationships with one another in 
one or more of their innumerable past incarnations. 

--- PAGE 307 ---
THE INVITATION FROM 
THE KING OF NEPAL 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W
HEN the Jetsun Milarepa was practicing the River-Flow Samadhi 
and observing silence in the Riga Daya Cave of Nyi Shang of 
Mon, a few local huntsmen came that way. Seeing the Jetsun sitting 
motionless, they were all struck with wonder and doubt. After staring at 
him for a while, they suddenly became frightened and ran away. After a 
time they crept back one by one. Drawing their bows, they asked the 
motionless Jetsun: "Are you a human or a ghost? If you are a man, answer 
us." But the Jetsun still sat motionless without uttering a word. The 
huntsmen then shot many poisonous arrows at Milarepa, but none of 
them could hit him. They tried to throw him into the river, but they 
could not lift his body. Then they lit a fire, but even this could not bum 
him. Finally, they moved his body [by lifting the seat and ground he sat 
on) and heaved it over a steep cliff into the great turbulent river below. 
Yet, still in a serene lotus posture, the Jetsun's body did not touch the 
water, but floated above the river. Then it started moving upward and 
finally came back to rest in its original place, all this without Milarepa 
having uttered a single word. 
All the huntsmen were amazed and hastily departed. On their way 
home, talking loudly about the incident, they approached the foot of a 
hill. Chira Repa, being nearby, heard their talk and appeared before 
them, saying, "That was my Guru, the supreme Yogi of Tibet. These 
miracles have proved him to be an accomplished being; even animals 
understand his preaching!" Then he told them the story of Milarepa and 
the deer and bitch, also how he had been practicing the Dharma through 
the Jetsun's influence. At this, great faith and reverence toward the Jetsun arose within the huntsmen, and from then on the name of Milarepa 
was heard throughout Nepal. 
--- PAGE 308 ---
At that time, the reputation of, and the tales about, Milarepa reached 
the ear of the King of Y e Rang and Ko Kom, who also became filled 
with great faith and reverence toward him. One day, the All-Merciful 
Mother Tara revealed Herself to the King and said, "The cloth of Ka 
Shi Ka and the supreme Ahrura [myrobalan- a universal medicine] 
which are now stored in your treasury should be offered to the great 
Tibetan Yogi, a Bodhisattva of the tenth [and final] stage, who is now 
at the mountain cave of Nyi Shang Gadaya north of Nepal. This will 
have great significance for the future." Thus She prophesied. The King 
then sent a man who spoke Tibetan to visit Milarepa. When 'the man 
saw the ascetic way in which the Jetsun was living, and how he had renounced all the necessities and affairs of this life, he was greatly impressed and struck with wonder. A great faith arose within him. Thinking, 
"This yogi is undoubtedly Milarepa himself, however I must make sure," 
he said to the Jetsun, "Oh Guru! What is your name? Don't you find it 
hard to live thus without taking nourishing food? What does this mean? 
Why is it necessary to abandon all belongings and material possessions?" 
Milarepa then answered the envoy, "I am the Tibetan Yogi, Milarepa. 
'Without belongings' means \vithout sufferings.' Now, listen to my 
song": 
I bow down to all holy Gurus. 
I am the man called Milarepa. 
For possessions I have no desire. 
Since I never strive to make money, 
First I do not suffer 
Because of making it; 
Then I do not suffer 
Because of keeping it; 
In the end, I do not suffer 
Because of hoarding it. 
Better far and happier is it 
Not to have possessions. 
Without attachment to kinsmen and companions, 
I do not seek affection in companionship. 
First I do not suffer 
Because of heart-clinging; 
Then I do not suffer 
From any quarreling; 
In the end I do not suffer 
Because of separation. 

--- PAGE 309 ---
The Invitation from the King of Nepal 
It is far better to have no affectionate companions. 
Since I have no pride and egotism, 
I do not look for fame and glory. 
First I do not suffer 
Because of seeking them; 
Then I do not suffer 
In trying to preserve them; 
In the end I do not suffer 
For fear of losing them. 
It is far better to have no fame nor glory. 
Since I have no desire for any place, 
I crave not to be here, or there. 
First I do not worry 
About my home's protection; 
Then I do not suffer 
From a fervent passion for it; 
In the end I am not anxious to defend it. 
It is far better to have no home nor land. 
With great faith in Milarepa, the envoy went back to the King of Ye 
Rang and Ko Kom and informed him in detail about the Jetsun. Then 
the King's faith and reverence were also confirmed. He said to the envoy, "Go and see whether you can persuade him to come here. If he 
does not accept the invitation, you may offer him this cloth of Ka Shi 
Ka and also this supreme drug, Ahrura." 
Accordingly, the envoy went back to Milarepa and said, "I was sent 
by the King of Ye Rang and Ko Kom, a ruler with great faith in the 
Dharma, to invite you, the Tibetan Yogi, to come to his country." Milarepa replied, "In general, I do not look up to people and do not stay in 
cities; in particular, I do not know how to entertain kings, nor do I need 
good food or worldly pleasures. It is not mere words or a myth that a 
man practicing the Dharma should be indifferent to hunger and cold, 
and should hold the knife-of-starving to his death. You, envoy of the 
King, rna} return to your country. I will follow the order of my Guru, 
Marpa, to meditate in solitude." The envoy then said to the Jetsun, "So 
be it, if you insist. But would it not be a sorry case indeed that a great 
king, having sent a special envoy to fetch a common yogi, got nothing 
back but the return of his own envoy's empty hands and thorn-pricked 
feet?" To this the Jetsun replied, "I am the great Universal Emperor. 
There is no other emperor who is happier, richer, and more powerful 
than I." The envoy retorted, "If you claim that you are the great Uni-

--- PAGE 310 ---
versa] Emperor himself, then you must have the Seven Precious Articles 
of Royalty.1 Please show me one of them." The Jetsun replied, "If you 
worldly kings and officers will follow my Royal Way, each of you may 
also become the Supreme Emperor, and thus be rich and noble." Whereupon he sang: 
If you kings and courtiers who seek pleasures, 
Follow the Royal Succession of Milarepa, 
Eventually you will obtain them. 
This is the Royal Succession of Milarepa: 
My faith is the Royal Precious Wheel 
Revolving around the Virtues day and night. 
My wisdom is the Royal Precious Gem 
Fulfilling all the wishes of the self and others. 
The observance of discipline is my Royal Precious 
Queen; 
She is my adornment, one most beautiful. 
Meditation is my Royal Precious Minister; 
With him I accumulate the Two Provisions!2 
Self-respect is my Royal Precious Elephant, 
Which takes responsibility for the Buddhist Dharma. 
Diligence is my Royal Precious Horse, 
Which bears the Klesas to Non-ego Land. 
Study-and-contemplation is my Royal Precious General, 
Who destroys the enemy of vicious thoughts. 
If you have these Royal Precious Trappings, 
You will gain a king's fame and prosperity, 
And conquer all your foes. 
You then may spread the Ten Virtues in your dominion, 
And urge all mother-like sentient beings 
To follow my noble teachings. 
"This is indeed the tradition of Dharma," cried the envoy. "It is truly 
wonderful. If you insist upon not coming with me, I have here two 
precious things to offer you. They are sent by my King; one is the cloth 
of Ka Shi Ka, and the other is the supreme drug, Ahrura." 
The Jetsun accepted these two gifts and then duly offered good wishes and dedications for the King. 

--- PAGE 311 ---
The Invitation from the King of Nepal 
About this time, Rechungpa and Shen Com Repa set out to find the 
Jetsun in order to invite him [to return to Tibet]. While on their journey, they encountered a band of brigands from Nyi Shang and Nepal. 
When the bandits were about to rob them, they cried out that they were 
yogis, and asked to be spared. But the bandits replied, "Only the San 
Chia Yogi [Milarepa] can be considered as a real yogi. He is one 
whom poisoned arrows cannot harm, fire cannot burn, and water cannot drown. When one throws him over a cliff, he flies up again. He even 
refused the invitation of the King of Ko Kom." 
Rechungpa then told the bandits that it was just for the sake of finding the Jetsun that they had come to this place. The bandits then directed them to Milarepa's abode.3 
When the two Repas finally found the Jetsun, they saw that he was 
dressed in the cloth of Ka Shi Ka and that upon a stone plate [before 
him] was laid the supreme drug, Ahrura. They bowed down to him and 
asked, "How have you fared, dear Guru? How is your health?" The Jetsun replied, "I am very well indeed. Let me tell you how well I am! 
Now, hearken to my song": 
This is a place where flowers bloom, 
And many kinds of trees dance and sway; 
The birds here sing their tuneful melodies, 
And monkeys gambol in the woods. 
It is pleasant and delightful to stay here alone. 
Truly this is a quiet and peaceful place. 
With my Guru above my head, it is joyful here to 
meditate; 
It is pleasant here to enjoy the Inner Heat; 
It is happy here to practice the Illusory Body, 
The spontaneous liberation from all worldly desires. 
Happy is the melting away of the dream of confusion; 
Joyous is absorption in the Great Illumination; 
Happy is the sight of the dark Blindness leaving; 
Joyful it is to become Buddha Himself 
Without practicing Transformation Yoga. 
It is happy to realize completely 
The true nature of Bardo and to remain 
In the transcendental realm of the Great Bliss. 
Your Father finds so much happiness and pleasure 

--- PAGE 312 ---
In enjoying his invaluable blessingsThe joy of eating luscious fruits grown on the mountain, 
And drinking sweet cool water from the springs. 
Reflect upon my words, and you will understand my 
meaning. 
Were you robbed, my sons, by bandits on your way here? 
If so, credit it to your previous Karma. 
You should realize that no money means no foe. 
Never, oh my sons, hoard or pile up wealth. 
If you can tame your mind, 
You will have no foe! 
Never, oh my children, hold hate in your hearts. 
If you can tame your mind 
You will have no foe! 
Look up to the face of Buddha! 
If your compassion ever grows, 
You will have no enemy! 
My sons, you should regard others as dearer than 
· 
yourself. 
Shen Com Repa then said, "It is just because a yogi like you, dear 
Jetsun, can have such happiness and tolerance toward his enemies, that 
we have come here to invite you [to return to our own country). We 
see no need for you to remain in the solitude of a hermitage. Please 
come to Tibet to help sentient beings there." The Jetsun replied, "To 
stay in a hermitage is, in itself, to help all sentient beings. I may come 
to Tibet; however, even there I will still remain alone in a hermitage. 
You must not think that this is an ill practice; I am merely observing 
my Guru's orders. Besides, the merits of all stages in the Path are acquired in the hermitage. Even if you have very advanced Experiences 
and Realization, it is better to stay in the land of no-man, because this 
is the glory and tradition of a yogi. Therefore you, also, should seek 
lonely places and practice strict meditation. Now, hearken to my song": 
Thanks to my Guru must still be paid, 
And sentient beings still liberated. 
I meditate in gratitude to Him, 
Not because He, the Jetsun, is in need; 

--- PAGE 313 ---
The Invitation from the King of Nepal 
This is the oath and act of accomplished beings. 
The wild ass, with white mouth, in the North, 
Never bends low his head, even at threat of death. 
It is not because he desires to die; 
This is but his act and wayThe natural function of this wild beast! 
The flesh-eating tigress, in the South, 
Never eats her own breed's flesh, even when she starves, 
Not because there is a principle to follow; 
This is but her act and wayThe natural function of this great beast! 
The white lioness, in the West, 
Never leaves the snow mountain, even when she freezes, 
Not because she cannot go elsewhere; 
This is but her act and wayThe natural function of this queen of beasts! 
The great eagle, in the East, 
Strains his wings whenever he is flying; 
But never in his mind is there the fear of falling. 
To hover in the sky, 
Is the natural way and action 
For this king of birds! 
When in meditation Milarepa perseveres 
And renounces all wordly things, 
He is not a prey to base ambition; 
To abjure craving is his natural function. 
Liberated yogis remain in seclusion, 
Not because they fear disturbance and distraction; 
It is the way and the tradition 
Of all accomplished beings. 
When monks and lay disciples 
Discipline themselves in meditation, 
It is not to gain in precedence o'er others; 
It is the way and the tradition 
Of all liberation-seekers. 
--- PAGE 314 ---
For you, faithful and well-gifted disciples, 
I sing these Pith-Instructions; 
This is not for sport or pleasure -
It is the tradition of my Lineage. 
Rechungpa then said, "I will keep these admonitions in my heart. 
You, dear Jetsun, are indeed different from other people. By the way, 
who offered this fine cloth and superb Ahrura to you?" 
Milarepa then replied in this song, "The Gift from Man and Deity": 
In the country of Ye Rang and Ko Kom 
Lives a pious king, a Bodhisattva, 
Victorious in the Dharma. 
A prophecy from the Mother of All Mercy 
To him was given in revelation. 
Said the Mother of All Mercy, 
"Invite Milarepa to see you. 
He is now meditating 
In the cave Gadaya of Nepal." 
Knowing the uncertainty of death, 
I refused the invitation. 
I was then offered this cloth of Ka Shi Ka, 
Made from fine bark of the Bal Dkar, 
Now a sweet companion for my Dumo4 meditation! 
I was also offered the superb drug, Ahrura, 
Which cures all ills of the Four Elements. 
Because of this worthy gift, 
I foresee that in the next seven years 
All people in this King's country 
Will be immune from sickness and disease. 
Both Repas said to the Jetsun, "We will not indulge in the Eight 
Worldly Desires and will sincerely practice our devotions. Now for the 
welfare of sentient beings, please come to Tibet." Because of their 
earnest and repeated requests, the Jetsun finally agreed and went to 
the Nyan Yuan Cave of Chu Mdo on Lashi Snow Mountain, and 
resided there. 

--- PAGE 315 ---
The Invitation from the King of Nepal 
One day Tserinma, a local goddess, came to molest Milarepa while he 
was enjoying the company of some low-born fairies in the forest of Sen 
Ding, but in a silver mirror he saw and recognized Tserinma [in her true 
form]. There~1pon she vanished into the sky. 
The next year, when the Jetsun was staying at Chon Lun, Tserinma 
again tded to intrude. She saw Milarepa riding on a lion, painted with 
cinnabar, dressed in sun and moon clothes, and holding a canopy and 
a victorious banner in his hands- then vanishing into the sky. Having 
failed again to trap Milarepa she withdrew. 
This is the story of Milarepa receiving offerings from the King of Ko 
Kom in Mon, together with a brief account of the intrusion of [the goddess] Tserinma. 
NOTES 
1 Seven Precious Articles of Royalty: These are the wheel, gem, queen, min· 
ister, elephant, spirited horse, and commander-in-chief- the symbols, or necessary possessions, of a king. 
2 The Two Provisions (T.T.: Tshogs.gl"'is.): Journeying along the Path toward 
Buddhahood, one needs a suppiy of two "spiritual provisions." One is the Provision 
of \Visdom and the other is the Provision of Merits. The former is the study, understanding, and practice of the Prajt1aparamita, the latter is the study and practice of 
all meritorious deeds, including charity, discipline, diligence, tolerance, and meditation. 
3 The meaning of the passage here is very obscure. This is only a approximate 
translation. 
4 Dumo (T.T.: gTum.Mo): the mystic heat produced by the practice of Heat 
Yoga. 

--- PAGE 316 ---
THE GODDESS 
TSERINMA'S ATTACK 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
He, who is born in the Snow Country, 
Free from all worldly taints, 
Blessed by the Succession of Naropa -
The wondrous one who has conquered pain 
and trialsThe cure, the supreme remedy 
For the ills of sentient beings, 
Revered by all like sun and moon, 
He is the Holy One, the famous Mila. 
I bow to Him, the Father Repa, with great veneration. 
In the snow country to the North, on the border between Tibet and 
Nepal, where the people speak different languages, there was once a 
magnificent and prosperous trading center where one could find all kinds 
of merchandise. There stood the palace of the King of the Nagas, and 
there the sound of the conch-trumpet could be heard. It was a place 
where wealth and fortunes spontaneously increased. On the east side 
of the gem rock rising like a leaping lion, at the left corner where the 
Heavenly Nun, the Propitious Goddess of Long Life [Tserinma] lives, 
there was a quiet spot where dwelt the great Repa Yogi, Milarepa. It 
was a place encircled by the deities of the snow mountains, and abounding in pastures and meadows where many healing herbs could be found. 
It was a place of blessing, situated near the bank of the Lohida [Lodahan?] River- the quiet hermitage of Medicine Valley. 
In the year of the Water Dragon, while Jetsun Milarepa was practic-
--- PAGE 317 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
ing the Flowing-River Yoga, just past midnight of the eighth day of the 
first month of the summer season, the eighteen Great Demons, leading 
all the ghosts and spirits in the whole Universe, came to attack him in 
order to hinder his devotion. By their great power they shook the earth, 
changed [the appearance of] the sky, and made their magic. Among 
them there were five extremely dreadful, wild-looking, flesh-eating female demons who displayed themselves in a number of ugly and ferocious forms conjured up to distract the Jetsun from his meditation. 
Whereupon, Milarepa sang a song, "Calling the Buddhas and :Oakinis 
for [my] Army": 
I pray to you, precious Guru, 
The famous Lho Draug Wa with Three Perfections. 
I, the destined disciple, sincerely pray to you. 
Father from the Realm of No-form 
You see all that happens. 
In this quiet place on the way to Orin River, 
I, the Tibetan Repa Yogi, have been deep in meditation. 
The visions, produced by concentrating Pra~Ja 
[in my bodyjl 
Amuse and fascinate me 
Like a fantastic play! 
The ghosts and Devas in the Realms of Form 
Are all assembled here; none is left out. 
Most eminent among them are the five female demons 
Who into dread and hideous shapes have turned. 
They have come to hinder my devotion, 
And seek occasion [to distract me]. 
I see a demoness grin like a skeleton, 
And lift up l\1ount Sumeru; 
I see a red one put out her tongue which drips with 
blood 
And swallow the ocean waters. 
The most dreadful one appears as Yamantaka,2 
Clashing a pair of sun-and-moon-like cymbals. 
I see an ash-smeared demoness dancing 
On the stars and planets, while she loudly laughs. 
I see a beautiful coquettish goddess, 
' 
Whose looks incite one's ardor to extremes. 
With her enticing smile and captivating features, 

--- PAGE 318 ---
She is most attractive and alluring. 
There are also other vicious demons, 
Stretching out huge anns, without their bodies showing, 
They bend the forest trees, 
Toss rocks, and shake the earth. 
I see them digging trenches in the Four Directions 
[to surround me]; 
I see the four borders guarded by four giants; 
I see fires aflame throughout the heavens, 
And floods all the Four Continents submerging. 
The sky is crowded with Non-men demons 
With loud and piercing voices. 
They shout, "Out! Out! Get out of here!" 
Sending down a rain of dread diseases, 
They laugh: "Ha, hal The foundation of his 
wisdom is collapsing!" 
When such hindrances descend upon me 
I pray you, oh my gracious Gurus · 
And Patron Buddha, bestowers of accomplishment, 
I pray you, holy Bha Wo and Bha Mo3 
Who dwell in the Region of RealityI pray you, guards of Dharma, protectors from all 
hindrances, 
Who have great magic power and mighty armit!SProtect, support, and help me; 
Bless me and consecrate my mouth and body; 
Display your anger, bare your canine teeth, 
and show your fearful faces; 
Pray manifest in your most dreadful forms. 
Oh Father and Mother deities, 
Display the ghostly form of YamantakaHe who is most prideful and most insolent. 
I pray you, Wrathful Deities in the heavens, 
Let from your mouths the lightning flash; 
With thunder growl, "Hiirp! Pail" midst sheets of rain. 
Arrogantly laughing in twelve different ways, 
Destroy the nets and snares of all these demons! 
That which hinders body is thus destroyed without; 
That which hinders mind is thus destroyed within; 
The unfavorable conditions are thus transmuted 

--- PAGE 319 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
Into the practices and teachings of the Bodhi-Path. 
Pray drown these vicious demons in your floods. 
Do you not hear me, holy, supreme Yidham and :Oakinis? 
Thus the Jetsun sang and prayed fervently to the Gurus and Patron 
Buddhas [Yidham]. In the meantime, the eighteen Devas and demons, 
the main party among the adversaries, thought: "Judging by the words 
he has just spoken, he appears to have lost his peace of mind and to 
have been disturbed by us. We will soon have a chance [to destroy 
him.]." This thought pleased them, but they were still uncertain about 
[the extent of] Milarepa's inner Realization and Enlightenment. With 
hesitation and misgivings, they decided to attack him with many insulting and threatening words in order to test his achievement in Yoga. 
Whereupon, the Devas and demons sang together a song called "Proclamation of the Hindrances": 
Oh you, the deep-voiced singer, 
Who chants loudly and lyrically 
Like the humming of Vedic sages! 
You, the Yogi, who remains alone in the hermitage, 
You, who have sent for Deva and :Oakini armies, 
Are you not the great Repa ascetic? 
But when your body is deprived of all assistance, 
You will be shaken and alarmed. 
Though you are in a state of panic now, 
Listen to our song while we show our lenient faces. 
The gem-dragon with a pair of golden wings 
Is called the Ruler of Nam Lo. 
When he flies up in the sky he sees beneath his wings 
A propitious forest growing on the cliff. 
Embraced by ranges of snow mountains, 
Lies Medicine Valley on the high plateau. 
Upon this auspicious eighth day in the lunar month, 
Eighty-thousand trouble-makers are here assembled. 
The sky is overshadowed by this demon army. 
From the great Devas and mighty spirits of the Cosmos, 
Down to the small and low earth-crawling serpent 
spirits, 
All have appeared in their conjured wrathful forms. 

--- PAGE 320 ---
With miraculous power and insatiable yearning 
We have come to confuse you and to hurt you. 
The Eighteen Great Demons are the leaders; 
The guards in the Ten Directions are the Ten 
Retinue Demons; 
We have with us the fifteen great Child Demons, 
And the five unique Flesh-eating Demonesses. 
We have with us the Bha Mo Demoness; 
She eats the flesh of humans and drinks blood. 
She lives on [sacrificial] odors and eats stones. 
We have with us the Srinmo Demoness, 
Who can demonstrate all actions in the world. 
We, all the Devas and spirits here assembled, 
Cast dice for lots before we came. 
The divination said, "Now it is your turn 
To be slaughtered, Yogi." 
There is no way of your escaping! 
You have no power, no freedom. 
We have come to take your life, your soul, and spirit; 
To stop your breath and take consciousness from 
your body, 
To drink your blood and eat your flesh and Skandhas.4 
Now your life has come to its final endingYour Karma and all your merits are exhausted. 
Now the Lord of Death will eat you, 
And the black rope of Karma bind you fast. 
Tonight you leave this world. 
Do you regret your deeds done in this lifetime? 
When the army of the Lord of Death arrests you, 
Will you be certain of escaping, 
Or prepared without fear to die? 
Are you confident of not falling 
Into the Three Miserable Realms? 
This we ask you. 
Tonight you shall follow in our footsteps; 
A guide sent by the Lord of Death will lead you. 
Most dreadful are the dark realms of the Bardo -
To these new places, unfamiliar, 
You now must go. 

--- PAGE 321 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
For your body, have you a protector? 
For your mouth, have you the Horse of Wishing? 
For your mind, are you ready to go to other realms? 
Alas, poor Yogi, you have neither friends nor kinsmen, 
This remote place is dark and perilous, 
This lonely path is difficult and hazardous, 
For you must proceed alone without companions. 
Here you should not stay -
You should depart at once. 
Thus sang the Devas and ghosts. The Jetsun then thought, "You demons and all the manifestations in the cosmos are merely conjurations 
of one's own mind; this is explicitly taught in all the holy Sutras and 
Sastras. According to the nectar-like teaching, clearly pointed out by my 
holy Guru, the nature of mind is the Illuminating Essence, beyond all 
extremes of playwords. It is never born and it never dies. Even though 
the myriad armies of the Lord of Death encircle it, and rain weapons 
upon it, they cannot harm, destroy, or sully it. Even though all the 
Buddhas in the Ten Directions and the Three Times should gather all 
their merits, and ray their infinite beams of light upon it, they could not 
make it better; nor could they color it or form it into substance. It will 
remain as it is, and can never be destroyed. This fetter-like body of mine 
was made out of subject-object clingings, and is destined to die. If these 
Devas and demons want it, I will give it to them. All life is transient 
and chat1geable. Now I have the opportunity to give my body away; if 
I do so, I shall make a worthy offering. It is owing to wrong subjectobject thoughts that I see the shadows of Devas and ghosts as they now 
appear before me; the perception of the affiicter and the afflicted is as 
delusory as clouds, mist, and flickering mirages seen through impaired 
eyes. These delusory visions are like 'veils' created by wavering thoughts, 
which themselves have been produced by habitual-thinking derived 
from Original Blindness since beginningless time in Sa111sara. In these 
phantom visions there is nothing to be afraid of." With this thought 
in mind Milarepa began to absorb himself into the Realm of Reality. Fearlessly, and with unshakable confidence, he sang a song: 
This is the well-known place called Dinma Drin -
A town to which both Hindus and Tibetans come, 
A market-place where many traders gather. 
Here you live, Queen of Heaven. 
Oh cruel Lady Tserinma of the Snow Lakes, 
Your hair is decked with the mountain snow; 

--- PAGE 322 ---
Embroidered on your skirt in all their beauty, 
Are the verdant fields of Medicine Valley. 
In this place, encircled by the river, 
Have now assembled eighty thousand trouble-makers. 
From the Heaven of Conjuration5 above, 
To the Realm of Hungry Ghosts belowAll the Devas and spirits here are gathered, 
Singing their stupid songs [to hurt and confuse me]. 
Floating in the sky above are the fragrance-eating, 
The rotten, the man-like, the hungry, 
The vampire-ghoulish, the cannibalistic, the harmful, 
The corpse-raising, and the J ung Po demons .... 
Oh these unthinkable myriad demons! 
Hardly can I recall their names! 
Especially fierce among them 
Are the five cannibal demonesses 
Who, with abusive language, curse me, 
And shout, "Die you shall, you must!" 
Because of my [human] fear of death 
I meditate on Immortal Mind, 
Absorbed in the Uncreated Realm. 
The keystone of the principle I practice 
Is self-liberation from Sa111sara. 
With this quintessence of all teachings, 
I clearly see Awareness, naked and unsubstantial. 
My confidence in the View is the transparency of flux; 
Since I know the Illuminating Void, 
I fear not life or death. 
Due to my [human] fear of the Eight Non-freedoms 
I meditate on flux and on Sa111sara's faults, 
And train myself to watch the Law of Karma. 
Then I take refuge in the [Three] Precious Ones. 
Through constant meditation on the Bodhi-Mind 
I eradicate forever the obscuring 
Shadows of habitual thoughts. 
Whatever may appear before me, 
I see as false illusions; 

--- PAGE 323 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
Thus I fear not the Three Miserable Paths. 
Fearful of life's uncertainty, 
I have developed skill in NaQI-Pral)a practice. 
Through practicing the Key-instruction 
Of the Three Identifying Excrcises,6 
I have checked my understanding of the Six Groups 
[of sense]. 
Thus, am I sure to see the Dharmakaya, 
And lead myself to the Path Divine. 
Since my mind has been totally absorbed 
In the uncreated Dharmadhatu, 
I have no regret nor fear of dying even now. 
You, the worldly Devas and foolish demons 
Who steal the lives of sentient men and women, 
Listen closely to my words. 
This human body, composed of Skandhas, 
Is transient, mortal, and delusory. 
Since in time I must discard it, 
He who would, may take it now. 
May the offering of my body serve as ransom 
For all mankind and sentient beings. 
May this offering serve as dedication 
For the benefit and blessing of my parents.7 
Since I have offered this, my body, 
With sincerest dedication, 
May you all be satisfied and happy. 
I hope, through this one virtuous deed, 
That the debts and Karmas I have owed 
From time-without-beginning in Saq1sara 
May all be cleared and settled finally. 
The running mind is void and unsubstantial-
! see this more clearly than you demons. 
You thought that I would easily be frightened 
When you raised the hosts of demon armies 
From the Eighteen Hells and Lokas to attack me. 
But I am a yogi of the Void, 
Who clearly sees the nature of Ignorance. 
--- PAGE 324 ---
I do not fear you demons -
Fictions conjured up by mind, 
Manifest yet non-existent. 
Oh, how fascinating is the play, 
How fantastic are the dramas of Saq1sara! 
Thus, without the slightest fear in his mind, the Jetsun sang. Then he 
cried out to the demons in these truthful words: "From beginningless 
time in the past until now, we all have taken myriads of bodily forms 
in our past incarnations, comparable only to the total sum of grains of 
sand in the great Universe. Nevertheless, we have seldom utilized the~e 
bodies for a worthwhile purpose. Instead, we have wasted them by doing meaningless things [over and over again), thus accumulating more 
and more Skandhas and pains. If you Devas and demons are interested 
in taking my body, which is made of the Four Elements and worldly 
Skandhas and filled with thirty-two kinds of filthy things, I can give it 
to you right now. Why not? Furthermore, all the sentient beings in the 
Six Realms are either my mother or my father. For the sake of clearing 
the debts I owe them, I now give my body away, from the top of my 
head to the toes on my feet- the twelve limbs, including the head, the 
five organs, the five essentials, the six internal contents, the flesh and 
bones, the feet and fat, the brain and cortex, the grease and blood, the 
hair and nails, the skin and dirt, the breathing, the life, the semen, and 
the vital energy - I now offer all of them to you. Whatever part you 
may desire, take it with you and enjoy it. I hope, through this merit of 
offering my own body, that from now on all demons and malignant spirits will be relieved of the hatred and ill-will in their hearts. Let this 
Merit become the very seed of their great compassion, and may it 
grow forever in their hearts! May the seed of this compassion, combining with the nourishment of Innate-Born Wisdom, free all demons 
forever from malignance and bitterness. May you all become very merciful, lenient, and kind. I now dedicate this Merit as a boon to all 
sentient beings, for their perfect happiness, goodness, and contentment." 
Upon hearing the Jetsun's words and sincere wish, all the Devas and 
demons [felt great remorse), and became very respectful to him. They 
ceased their hostile conjurations and remained there peacefully. The five 
extremely fierce flesh-eating I)akinls, who had displayed such dreadful 
forms, exclaimed, "The fact that you have no attachment or concern 
for your body is truly marvelous! We did not come here with so much 
hatred and determination really to harm you. We came only to test your 
Realization and understanding. Generally speaking, all the outer hindrances created by demons depend on one's inner clinging-thoughts. 

--- PAGE 325 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
When we first arrived, we saw you displaying a certain amount of apprehension, and heard you calling to the deities and Oakinis for help. 
Seeing this, we thought you might still have fears and desires in your 
mind. Consequently, we have been threatening you and ridiculing you 
with outrageous words. But, since we have heard your sincere and truthful replies, we regret our wrongdoing. Hereafter, whenever you run into 
danger or find your mind running wild, you should meditate on the 
Mind-Essence in an effortless manner. You will then surely conquer all 
hindrances. By so doing, even if all the Cosmos, from the [Heaven of] 
Brahma to the earth, should be shaken and overturned, you will not be 
frightened or overwhelmed." Having given this good advice to the Jetsun, the five intemperate demonesses sang together from the upper sky: 
Oh great Yogi Repa, 
Because of your accumulated merits 
You were born in a human body. 
You are well-gifted, endowed 
With leisure and favorable conditions. 
As the glad time ripens for fulfilling 
The wishes made in your past lives, 
You have found the teaching of holy Dharma, 
Thus enabling you to practice its devotion. 
You are a good man, a superior being, 
While we are only low and worldly creatures. 
Our intelligence is small, and great our ignorance; 
Our births are in the lowly forms of women. 
Having little merit, 
We ever nurse malignant thoughts; 
Because of our sinful deeds, we in the sky must travel. 
As you may not understand what we have realized 
Through these obscure words, 
They will be explained in parables. 
Your mind is profound and deep 
Yet, in the Mudra posture listen, 
And reason on what we sing. 
In the East, in the auspicious gate of China, 
A Chinese woman weaves a silken web; 
If she makes no mistakes 
Through chattering with her sisters, 
The wind without will not harm her work. 

--- PAGE 326 ---
Therefore, to weave with care 
Is of great importance. 
In the North, lies the country of the Mongols; 
Their brave and powerful troops are quick to fight. 
If no revolt takes place inside the country, 
They fear not even the men of King Gesar.8 
Therefore, to rule the people well and wisely 
Is of great importance. 
In the West, at the steep gate of King Tazee [Persia] 
Stands the gate of the secret-sign, 
In shape resembling a fleshy shell; 
If the forged iron bolts within it do not break, 
No cannon-ball from outside can shatter it. 
Therefore to fasten tight the inner portal 
Is of great importance 
In the South lies Nepal, the land of rocks and thunder. 
If the natives with their axes 
Cut not the healing tree of sandalwood, 
The Mon intruder will not harm them. 
To preserve the woods among compatriots 
Is of great importance. 
In this quiet place near the Drin River 
You, Milarepa, meditate correctly. 
If the thought of demons 
Never rises in your mind, 
You need not fear the demon hosts around you. 
It is most important to tame your mind within; 
Do not cherish any doubt there, 
Oh ascetic Yogi. 
Upon the hills of the Void Dharma-Essence 
You should guard the castle of firm Samadhi. 
If you wear the clothes of Bodhi-Mind 
And hold the sword of Wisdom-and-Compassion, 
The army of Four Demons cannot hurt you. 
If you harbor not subject-object thinking, 
No demons can e'er harm you. 
Even if you are surrounded by the hosts 
Of Yama, they cannot defeat you! 

--- PAGE 327 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
The attractions and inducements 
In the world outside are great; 
The drowsiness and distractions 
Within are powerful; 
Passions and attachments ever follow you like shadows. 
E'en though you may absorb yourself in transcendental 
Wisdom, 
It is still hard for you to conquer 
The illusions of the demons and ghosts withinFor extremely quick and clever are these Nhamdog.9 
On the steep path of fear and hope 
They lie in ambush 
With their ropes and snares, 
Waiting for a chance to trap you. 
The sentinel of vigilance 
Should therefore be posted 
To guard your inner citadel! 
This melodious song with four 
Parables and five meanings, 
Is precious as a pearl. 
A mirror of illumination, 
It lights up the mind. 
Please think of it with all attention, 
Oh well-gifted Yogi! 
Milarepa then replied, "As a rule, all trouble-making demons and Devas in the outer world are creations of the delusory thoughts of the 
clinging [mind], which grasps forms and deems them to be real. What 
you have said may all be very true. Nevertheless, we yogis do not consider obstacles as entirely evil and pernicious. Whatever forms and visions the demons may conjure we accept as helpful conditions and gra-
··cious gifts. Like the crack of a horsewhip, these demonic obstacles are 
very good stimulants for indolent beginners. An unexpected shock will 
undoubtedly sharpen one's awareness. Also, these demunic obstacles are 
the very causes that will aid one's body and mind in devotion, and quicken the arising of Samadhi; to those advanced yogis who have already 
reached stability on the P:ath, these obstacles become the nourishment 
of Wisdom. Such hindrances will also deepen the clarity of the Lightof-Awareness and improve one's inner Samadhis. Through them supreme 
Bodhi-Mind will arise, thus enaLling the yogi to better his devotion in 
a rapidly progressive way. Today I have witnessed the fact that all the 
Devas and demons have become Guardians of the Dharma. By the 

--- PAGE 328 ---
merit of seeing these Guardians as the Transformation Body of Buddha, I shall achieve many more accomplishments. I have thus trans~ 
muted the obstacles into aids for spiritual growth and turned the evils 
into virtues. Now, all the Nhamdog- those distracting, illusory, and 
confusing thoughts- appear as the Dharmakaya itself. Thus you have 
actually given me all the assistance [necessary] for devotion on the 
Path. Insofar as the Ultimate, or the true nature of being is concerned, 
there are neither Buddhas nor demons. He who frees himself from 
fear and hope, evil and virtue, will realize the unsubstantial and 
groundless nature [of thoughts ].10 Sa111sara will then appear to be the 
Mahamudrii itself; all turbulent, distracting thoughts will vanish into 
the Dharmadatu- the so-called non-gathering and non-separating 
Dharmakaya." 
The Jetsun again expounded these points as follows: 
Upon this earth, the land of the Victorious Ones, 
Once lived a Saint, known as the second Buddha; 
His fame was heard in all the Ten Directions. 
To Him, the Jewel a'top the eternal Banner [of Dharma] 
I pay homage and give offerings. 
Is He not the holy Master, the great Medripa? 
Upon the Lotus-seat of Medripa 
[My Father Guru] places his reliance; 
He drinks heavenly nectar 
With the supreme view of Mahamudrii; 
He has realized the innate Truth in utter freedom. 
He is the supreme one, the Jetsun Marpa. 
Undefiled by faults or vices, 
He is the Transformation Body of Buddha. 
He says: "Before Enlightenment, 
All things in the outer world 
Are deceptive and confusing; 
Clinging to outer forms, 
One is ever thus entangled. 
After Enlightenment, one sees all things and objects 
As but magic shadow·plays, 
And all objective things 
Become his helpful friends. 
In the uncreated Dharmakiiya all are pure; 
Nothing has even manifested 
In the Realm of Ultimate Truth." 

--- PAGE 329 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
He says: "Before Enlightenment, 
The ever-running Mind-consciousness11 within 
Is shut in a confusing blindness 
Which is the source of passions, actions, and desires. 
After Enlightenment, it becomes the 
Self-illuminating WisdomAll merits and virtues spring from it. 
In Ultimate Truth there is not even Wisdom; 
Here one enters the Realm where Dharma is exhausted." 
This corporeal form 
Is built of the Four Elements; 
Before one attains Enlightenment, 
All illness and all suffering come from it. 
After Enlightenment, it becomes the two-in-one Body 
Of Buddha clear as the cloudless firmament! 
Thus rooted out are the base [Sa111siiric] clingings. 
In Absolute Truth there is no body. 
The malignant male and female demons 
Who create myriad troubles and obstructions, 
Seem real before one has Enlightenment; 
But when one realizes their nature truly, 
They become Protectors of the Dharma, 
And by their help and [freely-given] assistance 
One attains to numerous accomplishments. 
In Ultimate Truth there are no Buddhas and no demons; 
One enters here the Realm where Dharma is exhausted. 
Among all Vehicles, this ultimate teaching 
Is found only in the Tantras. 
It says in the Highest Division of the Tantra: 
"When the various elements gather in the Nac;lis, 
One sees the demon-forms appear. 
If one knows not that they are but mind-created 
Visions, and deems them to be real, 
One is indeed most foolish and most stupid." 
In time past, wrapped up in clinging-blindness, 
I lingered in the den of confusion, 
Deeming benevolent deities and malignant 
Demons to be real and subsistent. 
Now, through the Holy One's grace and blessing 
--- PAGE 330 ---
I realize that both Sarpsara and NirvaQa 
Are neither existent nor non-existent; 
And I see all forms as Mahamudra_ 
Realizing the groundless nature of ignorance, 
My former awareness, clouded and unstable 
Like reflections of the moon in rippling water, 
Becomes transparent, clear as shining crystaL 
Its sun-like brilliance is free from obscuring 
clouds, 
. 
Its light transcends all forms of blindness, 
Ignorance and confusion thus vanish without trace. 
This is the truth I have experienced within. 
Again, the foolish concept "demons" itself 
Is groundless, void, and yet illuminating! 
Oh, this indeed is marvelous and wonderful! 
In this manner Milarepa showed his faithful obedience to his Guru's 
instructions and his decisive understanding of the Dharma. Whereupon 
the eighteen Great Demons and the other Devas and ghosts all addressed him with deep respect: "You are a yogi who has reached the 
stage of stability. Unaware of this, we came to insult you and make 
many troubles for you. Now we feel very sorry and regretfuL Henceforth, we shall follow all your commands and serve you." Having taken 
this oath, the innumerable demons and ghosts prostrated themselves before him like mud splashing and falling in heavy rain. Then the Devas 
and demons all returned to their own abodes. 
This is the story of how the great Repa, the indescribable Laughing 
Vajra, met the five worldly Oakinis, and replied [to their attacks upon 
him] in song. This story is told by Bod hi Radsa, the Master of Ngan 
Tson, from his indelible memory of the original account. It is written 
in a poetic style called "The Rosary of Pearls." 
NOTES 
1 According to Tantrism, most of the visions that a yogi sees in his meditation are brought about by the "concentrating" of a particular Pra~a. either the 
Pra~a of earth, water, fire, or air, in a specific "psychic" center of the body. 

--- PAGE 331 ---
The Goddess Tserinma's Attack 
2 Yamantaka (T.T.: g<;in.rJe.): one of the most wrathful deities in Tantrism, 
a sublimation of Yama, the King of Death. 
3 Bha Wo and Bha Mo (T.T.: dPah. Wo, dPah.Mo.). The latter appears in 
the Tibetan text here as "Dakima." Bha Wo and Bha Mo are male and female 
deities, especially those associated with the teaching and practice of Tantrism. 
4 Skandhas, or the Five Skandhas: the five constituents that made up a man, 
i.e., form, feeling, perception, impulses, and consciousness. 
5 The Heaven of Conjuration (T.T.: lHa.dWali.Phyug.): the Heaven of Isvara. 
6 The Three Identifying Exercises: to identify one's mind with the manifestation, with the body, and with the Dharmakaya. 
7 Since one has been reincarnating for innumerable ages on every plane, and 
must have had two parents in each incarnation, he has thus inevitably built a parental relationship with all sentient beings. It is out of this conviction of the kindred relationship of all beings that the Bodhi·Mind and the great Compassion of the Bodhisattva were brought forth. 
8 Cesar (T.T.: Ge.Sar.): The name of a legendary king of ancient Tibet whose 
romantic and literary adventures, as well as his military and religious achievements, 
have been the fountainhead of inspiration and imagination to Tibetan minds. The 
Book of Gesar (T.T.: rGyan.Drufl.) is a great Tibetan epic comparable to the Mahabharata and the Iliad. It has been one of the most beloved and widely read books 
in Tibet. The exact number of volumes composing this book is almost indeterminable because of its many complex versions and editions, but it is generally believed 
to contain about 15 large volumes, totaling more than a million words. The professional Tibetan troubadours, whose knowledge is confined almost entirely to this one 
great book, are called by the Tibetans the "wandering story-tellers of King Cesar." 
9 Nhamdog here implies the volatile and capricious aspects of the mind. See 
also Story 4, Note 4, and Story 1, Note 12. 
10 The literal translation of this phase should be: "The confusion has no 
ground or substance" (T.T.: hKhrui.Pa.gShi.Med.). 
11 The phrase "Yid.Gyi.rNam.<;es.", appearing in the original text, is tautological. It has therefore been translated here as "Mind·consciousness." 

--- PAGE 332 ---
THE CONVERSION OF 
THE GODDESS TSERINMA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
Crowned with the adornment of the 
Transformation Body of Tathagata 
Is the Supreme One, the translator Marpa. 
From His face flows 
The nectar stream; 
From His Whispered Lineage 
Comes to birth the Innate-Born. 
Grown out of this pure Wisdom 
Is He, the famous Yogi, Mila. 
To you is paid sincerest homage 
Fath~r Repa. 
On the border between Nepal and Tibet, at the left shoulder of the 
misty snow mountain, Queen of the Azure Heights, under floating golden clouds lay the blessed place, the Valley of Medicine. Close t-o the 
bank of the celebrated Lodahan [Lohida?] River, it was encircled by a 
crystal range of snow hills. There dwelt the renowned great Repa Yogi 
Mila, who kept his unbounded mind absorbed in the teaching of the 
Supreme Vehicle, and perfectly consolidated in the limitless BodhiMind. When the "Up-going Bliss"1 reached the Throat-center of Enjoyment, the Song of Vajra flowed spontaneously from him. Blessed 
by an uninterrupted wave of grace, he had transformed his base 
consciousness into Wisdom, and, through Tantric Madness2 had conquered all the demons and evil spirits. He was a yogi of great power 
and might. 
--- PAGE 333 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
Tranquilly absorbing his mind in the original state of Dharma-Essence, 
he occasionally demonstrated, with great compassion, the Samadhi resulting from the conquering of the Elements,3 now concealing and now 
manifesting his powers to subdue evil spirits_ While residing there, for 
the benefit of faithful human beings as well as devoted spirits and Devas, he also performed numerous and wondrous miracles_ 
On the eleventh night of the summer month in the year of the Water 
Snake, five bewitchingly lovable maidens came to [visit] him. They 
greeted him and circumambulated him many times. Then they said, 
"We have brought you some yogurt made from wild ox [Ba Men]' 
milk." Saying this, they offered Milarepa a [big] blue-gem spoon filled 
with yogurt. Then they sat one by one on his left and said, "We five 
girls beg you to take us to your heart and permit us to make our Vowfor-Bodhi before you." The Jetsun thought, "I have never seen such a 
precious and unique spoon, nor is there in the world any food comparable to this wonderful yogurt! [As to these girls], their manner of 
prostration, their reverse way of circumambulation, and their other unusual behavior prove that they are heavenly beings." But in order to 
find out whether they would speak the truth, the Jetsun pretended to 
be ignorant. He looked at them and asked, "Who are you? Where did 
you come from?" And then he sang tunefully: 
For the sake of several well-destined disciples, 
The Holy Dorje-Chang, the essence of Four Bodies, 
At a time of dispute and corruption, 
Incarnated as Marpa, the Translator, 
In the mountainous Country of Snow, Bar Dha Na,5 
In the northern part of Tsamlin. 
With the voice of a roaring lion, 
He, the Supreme Being, rode the Supreme Vehicle. 
By merely hearing His Voice one will 
Be saved from falling into the Lower Paths. 
I pray to you great Marpa, for those who seek mePray grant them your blessing and accomplishment. 
Oh Father, with the power of your compassion, 
I pray that their minds with ease may be converted, 
That within them the buds of Enlightenment may sprout. 
In the Pure Land of the Void 
Abide the Buddhas and their Sons. 
With your sunlit compassion, 

--- PAGE 334 ---
Pray send forth your rays of light 
To shine o'er the Wisdom-lotus 
In the hearts of your disciples, 
And make them blossom. 
Pray make the anthers 
Of the Four Infinities grow today. 
I have something to ask you 
Lovely maidens sitting on my left. 
There is nothing special I want to knowJust tell me, are you human beings, 
Or heavenly angels? 
For this is the first time I have seen you. 
Oh you five attractive damsels 
With such fine and charming bodies, 
In the dazzling light of magic 
Your enchanting elegance 
Glorifies the splendor of your beauty! 
Oh you radiant maids from Heaven, 
He who sees you at a distance seems 
As in a dim evening fog to see five 
Young maidens shopping in the town. 
But when he looks more carefully, 
He sees no tangible or steady image, 
Only a hazy, flickering silhouette. 
Thus am I much bewildered and perplexed. 
When I venture on the road, 
I see you run like rolling pearls, 
Chatting gaily with much laughter. 
But behind your coquettish charms and glamor, 
Like the morning star shining in the east 
You slowly fade away. 
Seeing that you disperse and assemble e'er in groups, 
I suspect that you are Devas or else fairies. 
When one looks at your eyes a'twinkle, 
One cannot help but smile! 
I wonder to myself, "are you magic :Oakinis?" 
The Buddhist way of circling in obeisance 

--- PAGE 335 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
Is from left to right, 
But yours from right to left, 
So you must Devas be, or fairies. 
The usual way to render "Eye Obeisance"6 
Is from left to right, 
But yours from right to left, 
So you must fairies be, or Devas. 
You shake the upper body when you bow; 
In every nine prostrations you ask of my welfare thrice; 
You nod and shake your heads 
When you make the "Eye Obeisance" once; 
Only heavenly ladies prostrate in such a way, 
But though you imitate, you are not really like them! 
In every eight prostrations you ask of my welfare twice 
After the fashion of all Devas; 
You bend your knees to earth -
The form of your obeisance is unusual. 
This spoon that's made with gems of blue 
With various jewel ornaments that you gave me, 
From Heaven came:. it is not of this world. 
I come from a distant country, 
And have traveled in many different lands. 
I have eaten many sorts of food 
And many wondrous things have I seen and heard. 
Compared to others, my experience should be not less, 
but more; 
But in all my life I have never tasted 
Such delicious yogurt made from wild ox milk, 
Nor have I ever seen such wondrous things. 
This is food from Heaven, 
It is not of this world. 
What you have said, oh happy fairies, 
Is indeed a cause for wonder, 
Especially your request to know the Bodhi-Mind. 
Judging by your faith and fondness for the Dharma, 
In past lives you must have had 
Deep affiliation with the Doctrine. 
--- PAGE 336 ---
I cannot but be pleased and most delighted. 
Listen to me, my good young women. 
I have more questions still to ask. 
I shall make no false remark, 
But only utter sincere words. 
From whence did you come this morning, 
And whither will you go this afternoon? 
Where is your home and what your family? 
What do you do with your magic powers? 
What magic power can you bestow? 
How came you to know of me? 
Was it through hearsay, or have we met before? 
Let no hesitation block your speech. 
Please answer me with honest words. 
The fairies replied, "You are the Jetsun, the supreme being. In your 
past lives you must have accumuulated many merits. Thus you were able 
to meet a unique and accomplished Guru. With a heart full of the nectar-like Dharma, you have fully realized the fallacy and illusiveness of 
worldly pleasures and desires. Thus, great compassion and benevolence 
arose in the depths of your heart, and a determination to cross the perilous, rolling river of Saqtsara was established. Through great hardships 
and austerities you have devoted yourself to the practice of Dharma. 
Having perfectly mastered the illuminating Samadhi within, you also 
attained great miraculous powers by means of which you are able to see 
·people's private affairs and thoughts [clearly and vividly)like images reflected in a mirror. Although you are perfectly aware of our families, 
lineages, and other things, still you pretend [not to know), and ask us 
about them. Surely, we shall be glad to tell you the full truth. Great Jetsun, please give us your attention for a moment, and listen to our song." 
And they sang melodiously together: 
At this sad time of Five-defilements 
Near Pakshu in Tibet, the home 
Of the red-faced demoness, was born 
A rare man in Snow Valley, 
Surrounded by evil, icy hills. 
Is he not the great Yogi, Mila? 
Because of your worthy deeds in previous lives 
You have met an accomplished Guru, 

--- PAGE 337 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
And are blessed by the divine Lineage. 
Bathed in the Nectar Stream of Grace, 
You have transformed your mind. 
Thus you see all pleasures and glories 
As phantom-like delusions. 
Having left this world so hard to leave, 
Diligently you persist in your devotions 
Allowing nothing to distract you. 
So you have become a heavenly yogi 
Forever dwelling in the Realm of Dharmakaya. 
Staying on the plane that is "Away-from-Playwords," 
You can use the power of that Samadhi, transforming 
Into many formsA reward for conquering all the elements. 
Yet even without it, all evils have you conquered. 
Seeing the miracles that you have wrought, 
Your faithful disciples were inspired and heartened; 
Filled with wonder, and with joyful hearts, 
Their hair stood up and their tears ran down. 
Oh, you are the Jetsun, the Pearl of the Crown. 
To you, all homage and offerings should be made. 
You are the Jetsun Yed Pa,7 Buddha's son, 
The refuge of all sentient beings. 
We, the five sky-going maidens 
From a non-human tribe, 
Who now sit beside you, 
Are low in birth and lesser still in merit. 
Pray, take pity on us with your great compassion! 
From the clouds of your grace, 
We pray the rain of nectar soon will fall 
Whereby the obstinate passions- the cause of all evils 
[In the world] -will be appeased, 
And the precious bud- the supreme Bodhi-Mind- will 
flower. 
You are the master of Yoga, 
The majestic Yogi of Forbidden-Acts. 
--- PAGE 338 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MlLAREPA 
Through cultivation of awareness in Sam~1dhi, 
You know well the minds and the capacities, 
The lineages, and Dharma-relationships of all men. 
Though you know them clearly without error, 
You pretended ignorance, and asked about us. 
We are Nu Yin, worldly demonesses, 
Ahdsidharata is our family line. 
We are ghosts who wander in graveyards, 
Worldly Oakinis,R who magic make. 
Many powers and accomplishments 
Can we bestow and grant. 
This morning in the house of Heaven, 
We opened the cloud gate, 
Rode the sun's rays, and came. 
This evening we are bound for India 
To attend the sacramental feast 
In Cool Carden Cemetery. 
On the right side of this valley, 
Fashioned like a triangle, 
Stands a high snow mountain. 
On the summit of the central peak we dwell. 
The crowning ornament of our house 
Is a crystal-like ice-mirror 
Reflecting rays of sun and moon. 
Half way up the mountain 
Lies a vase-shaped lake; 
The hovering clouds above it roof 
Our house, below lies the base, 
Forever wreathed in fog. 
This is Blue Queen Snow Mountain, 
The famous place, our home. 
First we saw you in the summer 
When we came to harm and to insult you. 
But you harbored neither anger nor resentment. 
In return, you bestowed on us the rain of Dharma. 
Thus for our evil-doing we all repented. 
Having tasted the nectar of your Dharma, 
We felt yet more thirsty and yearned for more to drink. 
So to-day we come to visit you, 

--- PAGE 339 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
The supreme Being who gives refuge. 
We pray you, the perfect man, 
To let us quench our thirst and satisfy 
Our yearnings at your nectar-stream. 
Milarepa then said, "Formerly, you were very malicious and resentful. You have repeatedly threatened me in wrathful shapes, and tried to 
harm and revile me. But I have fully realized that all manifestations are 
plays of the mind, and that the Mind-Essence is illuminating yet void. 
Therefore, I have never had the slightest fear or concern about delusory 
hindrances caused by demons. Observing this, you should sincerely repent of the damage and harm you have inflicted upon people and devoted yogis. \Vith deep remorse you should confess all your sinful deeds 
and should not commit any more, or harm other beings. You must first 
take an oath on this. If you do so, I can then admit you and grant you 
the prayer of Taking-the-Three-Refuges, and initiate you into the Raising of Bodhi-Mind. Otherwise, if you have not made yourselves handmaidens of the profound Teachings and of the Supreme Precepts, it will 
be like 'throwing a yak cow into the abyss,' or like 'dragging the nose of 
a corpse to the place of lament.' Now, pay the strictest attention and 
listen to the song of this old man": 
On this auspicious evening when midnight is 
drawing nigh, 
A silvery light gleams brightly in the East 
Chasing the darkness back across the sky. 
Is that not the lucid, crystal-pure moonlight? 
Riding on the glittering rays- your horses, 
You five maidens came 
Clad in shrouds of light. 
Are you not the five earth-bound :Oakinis? 
Near the bank of Lodahan River 
Is a delightful and quiet cell, 
Where lives a mad ascetic 
Who knows not disgrace and shame. 
Naked, he knows not bashfulness 
And feels nor heat nor cold. 
Absorbed in the mind-transcending Essence, 
Undistracted for even a single moment, 

--- PAGE 340 ---
He contemplates the nature of the Void. 
Is he not Mila, the great meditator? 
You five maids of magic have sung a song to me; 
I, the cotton-clad Yogi, sing in return for you. 
We have shared some vows and Karma in the past; 
'Til now you have of this been unaware. 
How happy must you be to know it now! 
In the late spring of last year 
You caused all ghosts and Devas 
To come here and afflict me. 
As the flags unfurled 
And the demon-soldiers drew up in array, 
All four armies showered missiles down 
And tried to harm me in all sorts of ways. 
But since I had already realized 
That all form is of the mind, 
While the mind itself is void, 
I was never frightened 
By these demonic shadow-shows. 
By merely seeing you poor sinful beings, 
An unbearable compassion, quite beyond control, 
Rose of itself within me. 
In return I showered on you 
The mercy-rain of Dharma. 
You were thus converted 
To faithful be, and pious. 
To-night as five lovely maids you came; 
Once more with your dazzling beauty 
You circled and bowed many times before me, 
Folding your hands upon your breasts 
To show sincere respect. 
With your melodious song 
You asked me for the Dharma, saying: 
"Pray, gather and precipitate the clouds of Bodhi-Mind, 
And shower down on us the Dharma-nectar." 
Since you have such earnest faith 
[I will give you the teaching 
And so fulfill your wish]. 

--- PAGE 341 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
Upon the lotus-seat a'top my head9 
Sits my precious GuruThe great Translator, matchless Marpa! 
Like the immaculate Sambhogakaya, 
He sits gracefully upon my head. 
From the radiant moon of His sweet compassion, 
Cloudless and resplendent, 
Emanates bright light, 
Shining upon the hearts of His disciples; 
It freshens the awakening anthers 
And brings quick to blossom 
The water-lily of their minds. 
You bewitching sorceresses, 
Have you ever seen these things? 
If not, the reason is your sins. 
You should thus confess, without reserve 
All that you have e'er done wrong 
Since time without beginning; 
Else you can ne'er receive my teaching 
And may fall into the wretched Realms once more. 
Before, you were malignant and were bitter, 
Accustoming yourselves to vice; 
For you to take an oath meant nothing, 
Nor would it have helped the Doctrine. 
He who does not respect the Law of Karma, 
[Will fall] into the dread Realms of Misery. 
You should, therefore, take heed 
Of even the smallest sin. 
He who knows not the faults of wordly pleasures, 
And from his depth of heart does not renounce them, 
From the prison of Saf!lsiira can ne'er escape. 
He should know that the world is but illusion, 
And work hard to subdue his desires (Klesas]. 
If for the wrongdoings 
Of all sentient beings 
In the Six Lokas 
One has great pity, 
He will avoid the Hinayana path; 
With a great compassion 
--- PAGE 342 ---
He should strive hard to emulate a Bodhisattva! 
Oh I)akinis of the Mahayana Path, 
If you can accept this beneficial preaching 
Which I have just imparted to you, 
Brothers and sisters, then, we may tread the Path 
together, 
Entering at last the Pure Land of Happiness. 
There we will consummate all merits and good works, 
There without doubt we will meet once more. 
Milarepa continued: "We are living in a time of defilement. Corruption and vice abound everywhere, people are voracious and harbor strong 
desires and passions [KI~as]. This is a very difficult time for one to 
subdue all his desires at once; therefore one should examine himself, 
and see what precepts he may take and live up to." 
The I)akinis then said to Milarepa, "Yes, indeed, Lord. It is only because you are so compassionate that you have preached for us the truth 
of Karma and called our attention to morality and virtue. This is all very 
wonderful, but we have heard this kind of preaching before. In the great 
cemetery of Sinhala, the Wisdom I)akini, the outstanding Earth-Protecting Goddesses, such as the Lion-faced one, Damala Richroma, the 
Dumo Ngosungma, and the accomplished yogini, Bhina Betsar, have 
already preached to us the merits and glory of the Bodhi-Mind. We 
have heard many sermons on morality and discipline. Therefore, please 
do not merely preach to us these [fundamental and preliminary] 
teachings. As to our demonstration of malignant and wrathful forms 
before you a while ago, 10 it was to make a crucial t~t of your Realization. Since we are protectors of Dharma, we would not do anything truly harmful to people. But now we pray you to give us the 
[Precept] for raising the Bodhi-Mind." 
The Jetsun replied, "Why not, since you ask with such sincerity and 
earnestness? Of course I will give the Precept to you. Now, prepare your 
offerings and MaiJgala for the ceremony. I would like to tell you this, 
however: I am not a person who cares for worldly goods and pleasures, 
bu~ each of you may now offer your special worldly accomplishments11 
to me, and also tell me your true names." 
Whereupon, with great enthusiasm and respect, the I)akinis sat in a 
row with folded hands to make their offerings. The first said, "I am the 
leader in this group. My name is Auspicious Fair Lady of Long Life 
[Drashi Tserinma]. I now offer you the accomplishment of protecting 
and increasing one's progeny." The I)akini who sat on the right side of 
the leader said, "My name is Fair Lady of the Blue Face [Tingeyalzun-. 

--- PAGE 343 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
rna]. I now offer you the accomplishment of divining with a mirror." 
The I)iikini who sat to the right of Tingeyalzunma said, "My name is 
Crowned Lady of Good Voice [Jupan Drinzonma]. I now offer you the 
accomplishment of refilling a storehouse with jewels." The I)akini who 
sat to the left of the leader said, "My name is Immutable Fair Lady of 
Heaven [Miyo Lonzonma]. I now offer you the accomplishment of 
winning food and prosperity." The remaining I)akini, who sat to the 
left of Miyo Lonzonma said, "My name is Fair Lady of Virtue and Action [Degar Drozonma]. I now offer the accomplishment of increasing 
livestock." 
Thereupon, the Jetsun imparted to them one by one the teaching of 
Taking Refuge, the Code of Morals, and the raising of the Bodhi-Mind 
of Wish and of Action, explaining them in general terms as well as in 
detail. \Vhereupon, the magical I)akinis were very much pleased and 
fascinated. They said to Milarepa, "Although we will not be able to 
practice these teachings in as perfect a manner as you have so edifyingly instructed us, we will try not to violate these principles and will 
never forget the gratitude that we owe you." They then expressed their 
sincere thanks to the Jetsun by bending their bodies towards him, 
laying their foreheads upon his feet, circling round him, and prostrating before him many times. Then they all flew into the sky and 
vanished in the far distance in a blaze of light. 
One evening, later in the month, the hostile and insolent demons of 
the Eight Divisions who had come before, returned to Milarepa with 
their servants and sons. From the low regions also came many lovely and 
coquettish worldly I)akinis [including the five who had come beforel, 
wearing splendid silk garments which fluttered lightly in the breeze, and 
adorned with jeweled bracelets, necklaces, and various other ornaments 
of precious stones. Together with their retinues and associates, these 
Non-men spirits all came to Milarepa, filling the sky before him. They 
then began to rain flowers upon him, to play all kinds of musical instruments, to burn fragrant incense, and to offer abundant food and drink. 
They said, "Pray relate to us your experience of Final Enlightenmentthe utmost understanding of all Buddhas in the Three Times, and the 
absolute consummation of the Path. Pray preach for us the Final Truth 
of Dharma." In response to their request Milarepa sang a song called 
"The Understanding of Reality," in which he illucidated the essence of 
the Final Truth and the Ultimate Reality: 
On the border of Tibet and Nepal 
Lies Dinma Orin, a wonder town. 

--- PAGE 344 ---
There lives the Medicine Deva, protectress of the 
natives. 
On· the splendid Snow Queen Mountain, the beauty 
of this land, 
Dwells the great Auspicious Lady of Long LifeShe is the lady with the braided hair, 
Her life is lasting as a diamond. 
At the left side of the mountain, 
Covered by clouds throughout the year, 
Are pasture lands and ranges of snow hills 
Where gently flows a winding Fiver; 
Close by is Medicine Valley. 
With great earnestness, I, 
The Yogi Milarepa, 
Meditate alone in this quiet place. 
You, proud worldly demonsThieves who steal yogis' lives -
Who came here once before to insult and scorn me, 
Have returned today. 
Are you not the same group 
Who affiicted me before? 
Late last evening, close to midnight, 
Five lovely maids came here. 
They vowed to raise the Bodhi-Mind, 
Offering wish-fulfilling accomplishments, 
And then they disappeared. 
Tonight, while the clear moon 
Shines o'er the earth serene, 
You five charming maidens, gay and skittish, 
Come once more. 
The silk scarfs round your lovely bodies 
Sway and flutter, your jewels 
Sparkle in the light. 
You have been conjured to perfection, 
Enchanting and most beautiful. 
At the Goddess Leader's call, the proud 
Devas and spirits of the Eight Divisions 
Have come with you, filling all the sky. 
They all offer me delicious food, 
And play such charming tunes. 

--- PAGE 345 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
Since you have asked for the utmost Truth and Final 
Teachings, 
You should heed most carefully, and give your 
full attention. 
Sentient beings in the Three Kingdoms 
Possess different Passion-Bodhis.12 
Among them there are many kinds of egoism 
And many types of behavior; 
They have a myriad ways of ego-clinging. 
To suit the minds of ignorant men, 
The Buddha said, "All things are existent." 
But in [the realm of) Absolute Truth 
Buddha Himself does not exist;13 
There are no practices nor practisers, 
No Path, no Realization, and no Stages, 
No Buddha's Bodies and no Wisdom. 
There is then no Nirviil)a, 
For these are merely names and thoughts. 
Matter and beings in the Universe 
Are non-existent from the start; 
They have never come to be. 
There is no Truth, no Innate-Born Wisdom, 
No Karma, and no effect therefrom; 
Sarpsara even has no name. 
Such is Absolute Truth. 
Yet, if there are no sentient beings, how 
Could Buddha in the Three Times come to be? 
For if there is no cause, there will be no effect. 
Therefore Buddha says, "In Mundane Truth, 
All Samsaric and Nirval)ic things exist." 
In Ultimate Truth, manifestation and the Void, 
Existence and non-existence, 
Are the same, being one in "taste"!14 
There is no difference, such as "this" and "that." 
All Dharmas are two-in-one in the Greatness. 
This is understood by those enlightened ones 
Who see no consciousness but Wisdom, 
Who see but Buddhas, and no sentient beings. 
Who see no Dharma-forms, but Dharma-Essence. 
Spontaneously a great compassion 
--- PAGE 346 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SO!':GS OF MILAREPA 
Flows out from their hearts. 
Their powers and virtues ne'er decline. 
They possess all merits and wish-granting powers. 
They have realized all virtues and the Truth. 
Oh, you ghosts and Devas here assembled, 
[\Vhcn you approach the preachers) 
You hear not the profound Dharma 
But hark to pagan ranting; 
\Vhen you reach the country of Ahbhira, 
You do not visit wise men, 
But go to mad instructors. 
Wolves and foxes wandering in graveyards 
Are frightened when they hear a lion's roar. 
Should there be a gifted one in this assembly, 
Through hearing this, my preaching, 
He will in time be liberated. 
Most joyful now am I; 
May you also be gay and happy. 
After singing this song, he said to the visitors, "The Buddha has 
preached numerous Dharmas, commonly known as 'The Eight Thousand Groups.' All these various teachings are given to different people, 
in accordance with their needs and capacities. However, the [utmost 
Truth is One] and the final destination [to which all paths lead) is 
One. This sole, absolute Foundation [of all] is the unaltered [ unactedupon and untouched] real nature of being. By merely understanding 
this Truth, one will not be able to liberate himself. He must proceed on 
the Path. Only thus can he actually realize what he has understood. The 
essence of the Path is the Two-in-One Voidness-Compassion, and 
though there are myriads of different paths or doctrines, they all lead 
to the Two-in-One Realm of Wisdom and Means, or the realization of 
the non-distinction of the Two Truths.''15 
Then the five Oakinis who had come to Milarepa the night before to 
take the oath of Bodhi-Mind, rose from the assembly and, standing to 
the left of the Jctsun, sang together a song of praise, "We See His 
Merits": 
Beneath the bright light in the sky 
Stand snow mountains to the North. 
Nigh these are auspicious pasture lands, 
And fertile Medicine Valley. 

--- PAGE 347 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
Like a golden divan is the narrow basin, 
Round it winds the river, earth's great blessing. 
At this time of defilement and corruption 
Came you, the ascetic Yogi, full of wonders. 
The food you eat is nectar of Non-thought, 
The drinks you quaff are natural secretions. 
In your mind, there is no disgrace or shame; 
In your mind there is nothing clean or filthy. 
You act like a madman leading an ascetic life. 
For the sake of testing your ability, 
We came last summer to this river bankTo the left of Lashi l'viountainAnd found you in Sendentsema Wood 
With your naked body indifferent to shame, 
Amusing yourself with the lesser fairies. 
We saw you in the mirror silvered thick, 
We saw your meditation powers and your wondrous feats, 
We saw your body vanish in the sky. 
By these wonders we were so amazed 
That in midautumn we returned. 
You were then meditating in the Tsonlung Cave, 
Absorbed in deep Samadhi. We crept in 
And saw you wearing clothes of sun and moon 
With a precious garland on your head. 
Your body was besmeared with ash of cinnabar, 
And in your hands, the canopy and victorious banner. 
We saw you riding a fierce animal, flying 
Through the firmament to vanish in the sky. 
Thus we had no chance to harm you. 
We came again last summer to put you to the test, 
Intending to disturb your meditation. 
But your mind was like the ocean, 
While your body burned with fire. 
Poisonous snakes were writhing round your head 
As an adorning diadem. 
Leaning on the blade of a sharp knife, 
You sat in the lotus posture on a spear. 
--- PAGE 348 ---
We saw you play a'top a wish-granting 
Ball, and swallow a whole mountain. 
Thus were we fascinated and bewildered too! 
You are a yogi who has mastered Mind-awareness, 
And like Indra, you can conjure and dissolve 
Your body and perform countless miracles. 
In your mind there is no pride, no thought. 
You are free of doubt, of hope and fear. 
You are a yogi like unto a lion, 
For you fear not and have no misgiving. 
You are a yogi like a great elephant, 
For you will ne'er be frightened by any obstacle. 
When one sees you, his heart is full of joy 
And the hairs of his body stand on end. 
By merely touching and beholding you, 
All obstacles are cleared away, 
All altruistic deeds accomplished. 
You are the Wish-fulfilling Gem, 
You are the Yogi, as the heavens great. 
Since you have realized what "beyond-words" means 
And never would be swayed by thoughts, 
Demons can ne'er disturb you! 
When we found we could not harm you, 
It seemed it was ourselves whom we were mocking. 
Thus we have changed our hostile stand, 
Conjuring wondrous and delightful visions for you. 
You also preached to us the Dharma, 
And led us to the harmonious Path and Peace! 
On that auspicious night last month 
You sowed in us the Buddha-Seed. 
The priceless buds in our hearts h:tve grown. 
You are the supreme teacher for the Path that no 
one can mistake, 
You are the shelter and refuge of all beings. 
Later, when you go to the Pure Land of Joy18 
Where stands the palace of Mijurpa Buddha, 
All the great Bodhisattvas will come to greet you. 

--- PAGE 349 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
The Oakinis above, on, and beneath the earth, 
Together with the meritorious Devas 
Will also come to greet you. They will bring 
Victorious banners and great canopies 
And play melodious music for your welcome. 
They will make you splendid offerings, 
Showing you the way to the Pure Land. 
Let us, who have seen you and heard you preach, 
Both human beings and Non-men, 
All become your servants 
And follow you to the Pure Land! 
Thus they sang, offering their sincere wishes and expressing their admiration. 
Milarepa thought, "These worldly Oakinis are very arrogant and incorrigible. They still have to be subdued and disciplined." So he said, 
"Fair ladies, it is indeed wonderful that you have such faith and respect 
for me and have expressed your sincere, pure wishes for the future. I 
have shown you the Path leading towards Buddhahood, and granted 
you the Precepts of the Bodhisattva. Now I am going to give you 
the Instructions and Precepts of the Diamond Vehicle, which abounds 
with skills and means; it is the easiest, fastest, and most versatile Path 
leading towards Buddhahood. Now you should prepare the offerings, 
and also surrender to me the quintessence of your lives." 
The Oakinis were thrilled with great joy. Immediately they arranged 
oblations on a grand scale, prostrated themselves before the Jetsun, and 
circumambulated him many times; and finally they offered him their 
lives. They then sat round him, as before. Thereupon, Milarepa vouchsafed them the Initiation called "Demonstrating the Awareness of Drol 
Ma," and the Initiation of the Goddess Kurukulla, together with the 
teaching of the Reciting-the-[words-of-] Essence. He admonished them 
to observe the discipline strictly, and instructed them to visualize their 
Guru sitting on their heads at all times. He taught them that whatever 
the crisis they might encounter, good or bad, they should look only to 
the Three Precious Ones for guidance and help. Never should they put 
their trust in pagan gods. The Jetsun then said, "You should know that 
the outer world is, in essence, identical with the Beyond-measure Palace 
of the Buddhas; all sentient beings are, in essence, identical with the 
Patron [Yidham] Buddhas. Whoever you meet, you should respect him 
and love him. Not even for a single moment should you have any malignant and hostile thoughts towards anyone, nor should you revile or hurt 
him in any manner. In all circumstances and at all times you should not 
forget the Self-Buddha Pride." 17 

--- PAGE 350 ---
The five goddesses then said to Milarepa, "Oh Jetsun, the teaching of 
Tantra is indeed the fastest, easiest, and most resourceful of all teachings. We are very grateful that you bestowed it and its precepts upon 
us. We impure sentient beings have been driven by deep-rooted habitual thinking since beginningless time in Saq1sara. We women, especially, are low of birth and inferior in intelligence. Though we cannot really understand that which you have imparted to us, we shall 
try our best to learn and practice it. Though we may not be able to 
perceive that all sentient beings are Buddhas, we shall not harm them 
in any manner. We will give assistance and service to the followers of 
Dharma, and will try our utmost to give special protection and help 
to the followers of your Lineage. We will provide them with all they 
need for their devotions and assist them to obtain all the favorable 
conditions they require. \Ve will serve them as their servants." Swearing thus, they bowed down to Milarepa and circumambulated him 
many times. Then they all disappeared into the sky. 
This is the story of how the indescribable great Yogi Milarepa, the 
Laughing Vajra, met with the five worldly I)akinis, including their leader, the Auspicious Lady of Long Life. Also found in this story is the song 
which answered the I)akinis' inquiry about the principle of raising the 
Bodhi-Mind. This event was recorded by the well-gifted, virtuous Repa 
Shiwa Aui on the peak of the Auspicious Mountain of Tuntin, by the 
left side of Dinma Drin market. In recording this story, Shiwa Aui has 
carefully and repeatedly inquired, and discussed [the matter] with the 
Auspicious Lady of Long Life in person. Afterwards, he met the Jetsun 
himself three times, the Jetsun also giving him, with approbation, some 
needed information. In that quiet, delightful, and accomplishmentgranting place, the Meritorious Forest of Ahom Chun, Shiwa Aui and 
Ngan Tson Dunba Bodhiradza, in consideration of benefiting some destined persons in the future, have faithfully put the Jetsun's words down 
without adding to or abridging the original narrations and events. Their 
rhetorical and well-arranged writing [deserves to be called] the Illuminating and Nectar-like Rosary of Words. 
NOTES 
1 "Up-going Bliss": According to the supreme Bliss-Void Yoga, a great bliss 
will arise if a yogi can lift his life-energy from the lower part of the Central Channel 

--- PAGE 351 ---
The Conversion of the Goddess Tserinma 
to a higher position. The consummation of this bliss is achieved when the lifeenergy reaches the Cakra at the top of the head. 
2 It is said that when a Tantric yogi reaches a very advanced stage of Enlightenment, he should practice the Tantric Madness or Act-of-Insanity by behaving 
like a lunatic, to completely emancipate himself from all conventional thoughts 
and habits and thus reach final and perfect Enlightenment. 
3 Lit.: The Sa111adhi of "Elements-Exhaustion" (T.T.: Zad.Pa.hByun.Bahi.Tiil. 
I'le.hDsin.): Having completely mastered the art of Dhyana, the yogi is said to be 
capable of working mirades by manipulating the Pra~a in various ways within his 
mind·body complex. He is thus able to conceal or bring into manifestation the power 
of each Element for a specific performance or purpose. 
4 Ba Men, the wild ox of Tibet: Some say this is another name for the Tibetan 
yak. 
5 T.T.: Bar.dHa.Na.: This seems to be another geographical name for Tibet. 
6 The Tibetan word, "sPyan.Phyag," means literally "eye obeisance." The 
translator presumes that this term refers to a certain eye·gesture (mudra) performed for the purpose of veneration. This may still be used in India, but is no 
longer extant in Tibet. 
7 Yed Pa (T.T.: bShad.Pa.): Milarepa was given the name of Yed Pa 
Dorje (the Laughing Vajra) by his Guru, Marpa, when he was first initiated. 
8 Worldly Qakinis (T.T.: hJin.rTen.mKha.hCro.Ma.): Khandroma, or Qakinis, the sky travelers, are not all more holy than, or spiritually superior to, ordinary 
sentient beings. According to traditional Tibetan beliefs, there are two kinds of !;>akinis: one is the holy, or transcendental type, and the other is the worldly kind. 
Tara, Dorje Paumo, etc., belong to the former category, for they are fully enlightened Buddhas manifesting in female form. The worldly Qakinis, such as Tserinma, 
are still bound by Sa111saric desires and ignorance despite their superhuman powers. 
9 Lit.: " ... at the upper end of my three Na4is." 
10 A while: ago: See Story 28. 
11 Worldly, or mundane accomplishments: miraculous performances and superhuman powers which are still of a Sa111saric nature. 
12 Passion·Bodhis (T.T.: hDod.Bahi.Byan.Chub.): This is a very rare term 
seldom seen in the general Buddhist scriptures. Literally it means the "Bodhi of 
Klesas." Although, according to the principle of Tantrism, it is permissible to say 
that human passions and desires (Klrsas) are in essence identical with the merits 
and wisdom of Buddhahood, it is incorrect to say that the two are absolutely identical in every aspect. Passion·Bodhis, or the Bodhi of Klesas, should therefore be 
treated as an exceptional term reflecting a certain special Tantric thought outside 
the general framework of Buddhist orthodoxy. 
13 This sentence as it appeared in the Tibetan text (Folio 151a, line 6) is as 
follows: "bCegs.Pas.Sans.rCyas.J\Iid.Kyan.Med." The translator believes that "bCegs. 
Pas.," meaning ''because of hindrances," is a misprint, otherwise it would be very 
difficult to explain, and to fit into this context. 
14 T.T.: Ro.gCid., lit.: "one-taste." A freer tramlation is "at-one-ment," or "the 
great one identity." "Ro.gCid." is a very widely used term in Tantric literature, denoting the all-identical or non-differentiated nature of beings. 
15 Two Truths: They are, first, the Mundane Truth (T.T.: Kun.rDsob.bDen. 
Pa.), and second, the Transcendental Truth (T.T.: Don.Dam.bDen.Pa.). The 
former can also be rendered as the "conditional, dependent, or expedient Truth," 
and the latter as the "absolute or final Truth." 

--- PAGE 352 ---
16 The Pure Land of Joy (T.T.: mi\lon.dGha.): the land of Buddha Mijurpa 
(T.T.: Mi.hGyur.Pa.; Skt.: Ak~obhyii): His position among the five Dhyiina Buddhas 
is in the East. 
17 Self-Buddha Pride (T.T.: !Hahi.i\la.rGyal.): A Tantric yogi should, in all 
daily activities, always remember his Patron-Buddha-Identification "feeling" which 
he has gained during his Arising Yoga practice. This Patron-Buddha-Identification 
Yoga is designed for the transformation of all worldly, empirical experiences into 
a higher order that may be described as corresponding to that of perfect Buddhahood. Thus, in the practice of this Yoga, the yogi is taught to think and to visualize 
his body as becoming the Buddha's body, his words as the Buddha's preaching, and 
his thoughts as the Buddha's all-manifesting Wisdom. The meditation exercise of 
"Identification-with-Buddha" is also called the "Arising of Self-Buddha Pride." 

--- PAGE 353 ---
GUIDING INSTRUCTIONS 
ON THE BARDO 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
The God of gods, 
Lord of I)akinis, 
Marpa the great TranslatorBlessed is he by the Transmission Gurus. 
A pearl radiates waves of grace 
From the crown he ever wears -
Blessed is he, the great Repa Mila. 
Delivered and matured is he 
Who has completed his devotion. 
To him, the Laughing Vajra, the gifted Repa Jetsun, 
I pay sincerest homage! 
To help the ignorant 
I now relate this story 
Of Mila's answer to the fairies, 
Wherein is given the pith of the instructions 
On guidance through the perilous Bardo. 
When Marpa the Translator was imparting the Initiation to Milarepa, 
the Buddha Sarpvara and other deities of the Mai)Qala, together with 
the thirty-two Guards of Dharma and I)akinis, and the sixteen Heavenly-Ladies-of-Offering, all revealed themselves in the upper sky. Mila· 
repa saw this vision clearly for a moment. He was then given the name, 
"Laughing Vajra," by his Guru and the I)akinis. 
Urged by Marpa, Milarepa devoted his life to meditation. Because of 
--- PAGE 354 ---
his extreme asceticism, he had gained the Tantric Accomplishments and 
Merits by [mastering] the [inner and outer] causations. Through his 
physical body he had attained the rainbow-like Body-of-the-Mind1 and 
so became the great Jctsun- one who had achieved the Ultimate Realization of Mahamudra. 
Now, Milarcpa was residing [in a green valley] to the east of the 
wondrous [market] town of Oinma Orin, bordering on the Mon region 
west of the lower Khum Bu. Beneath dark clouds, above the gate to the 
passage of the black planet Rahu and to the left of a snow mountain 
perpetually wreathed in clouds, lay this pasture land, Medicine Valley, 
where flourished emerald-like meadows, jasmine flowers, and various 
kinds of herbs. Gently flowing by were two rivers- the Auspicious Milk, 
and the Nectar and Power. [Milarepa's hut] was in a quiet and blessed 
spot known as the "Virtuous Palace Hermitage of Chu Bar." He was 
then completely absorbed in the Universal Realm of the Absolute Essence- the realm of departing-from-all-playwords, the illuminating 
realm of no-arising and no-extinction. 
It was in the autumn of the year of the \Vooden Horse, while the 
24th Constellation was declining, that the inhabitants of Oinma Orin 
were afflicted with the white and black smallpox, [and with] vomiting 
of blood, dizziness, fever, and many other severe and contagious dis· 
eases.2 Many livestock and human beings had died. 
In the late afternoon of the eleventh day of the second month of that 
autumn, when the declining sun looked like a fireball, a young girl 
[whom Milarepa recognized as a Oakinl] came to see him. Beautiful, 
charming, and radiant, she was dressed in a white silk robe of magnificent design, edged with jewel-like lace, and having an apron of exquisite 
·silk with gorgeous tassels. She bowed down at Milarepa's feet, circled 
him seven times, and made nine more prostrations. She then said, "Oh 
Jetsun, our people arc very, very sick. Please be kind enough to come 
with me to the other side of this snow mountain [to help us]." Mila· 
repa replied, "It is better that we go tomorrow. You may stay here tonight." The girl said, "If we go by the Road of Miraculous Light, 
through Manta Tsari [?] there will be no hardship. Oh please, please 
come! You must come today!" "This old man has never seen such a 
road before," replied Milarepa, "nor do I know where it is. But because of your earnest request, I shall go with you. It is better if you 
go ahead and show me the way." The girl then produced a woolen 
blanket, and lifting it up toward the sky, said to the Jetsun, "Let us 
ride on this blanket- it will carry us there at once." As soon as Milarepa stood upon the blanket, it rose in the air, and quick as lightning, 
they reached their destination on the other side of Queen of the 
Azure Heights Snow Mountain. 

--- PAGE 355 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
On the left slope stood a white silk tent with a golden covering. The 
ropes and pegs were inlaid with precious stones of magnificient quality. 
In this tent lay another beautiful girl, wrapped in many bedcoverings, 
and with a long tassel, which almost reached the ground, in her hair. 
Her eyes were flame-colored [as if she had a fever]. As the Jetsun entered, 
she made an effort to lift her head up a little, crying, "I am very sick. 
Please help me!" Milarepa asked, "How did you catch this disease? How 
long have you been ill? What are your symptoms?" The girl answered, 
"Last summer some shepherds came and lit a big fire near here. I was 
caught in the flaming smoke, which made me very sick at the time. Since 
last autumn I have not been feeling at all well, and today I feel extremely ill.3 Therefore I had to send for you. The vapors from our 
mouths have caused many people in this area to contract many diseases." Milarepa thought, "That's why so many people here have 
caught the pestilence. I cannot consent to cure her right away; first 1 
must admonish her." Then he said, "Fair lady, not long ago you came 
to me and took the Bodhisattva's Vow, and also received the teachings of the Patron Buddha. I preached to you at length on the virtues 
and Karma, but instead of following my instructions, you have violated them all. You have never given the slightest consideration to 
your moral obligations and the precepts! You could not even endure 
such a slight discomfort as that caused by the shepherds, and in revenge you have spread the worst kind of pestilence among innocent people, causing them great suffering and misfortune. Since you have violated the precepts, you well deserve such punishment. In view of what 
you have done, I can no longer trust you. If you will immediately 
heal all the people in this area, I shall then see whether or not I can 
help you. If you do not promise to do so, I shall leave at once. Since 
you, the She-ghost, have broken your own oaths and violated the precepts, you will surely be damned!" 
Hearing this warning from the Jetsun, the I;>akini was very frightened 
and immediately clutched Milarepa's feet and said, "We are blind and 
wicked beings. Because of our ignorance we have spread illness in this 
region. But please do not talk to us like this! As a rule, if the pure Devas 
and spirits from the higher ranks do not affiict us, we will never attack 
them first. Expecially, in consideration of your [former] admonishment, 
I have not harmed any people or sent others to affiict them. In the last 
month of this summer the river here overflowed, and all the narrow and 
precipitous places were flooded. [Taking advantage of this], some of our 
retainers, associates, and kinsmen, together with many flesh-eating and 
blood-drinking servants of ours, went about affiicting people. I will stop 
all the contagious diseases as soon as I get better. Therefore, please look 
after me and have pity on me." Thus she earnestly besought the Jetsun. 

--- PAGE 356 ---
Milarepa then performed for her the Hundred-Words Cleansing Ritual4 
and prayed for her to the Gurus and the Precious Ones many times. He 
also increased her longevity by performing the ritual of the Victorious 
Mother of the Crown.5 The next morning she was able to get up from 
her bed and make obeisance to him. 
During the next seven days the Jetsun continuously blessed her with 
the power of Illuminating-Awareness, and the girl was then completely 
cured. She became even more healthy and vigorous than before. After 
this Milarepa said to her, "Fair lady, as you have completely recovered, now is the time for you to go to the villages and help the people. 
Tell me what offerings you would like them to make to you?· What 
rituals should be performed to cure the sick?" She replied, "According to the reciprocal-relation principle of the Law-of-Causation, when 
we recover from a disease, so will the people. It is the common oath 
of all wordly l_)akinis6 that if one of us has been made unwell or unhappy, we are all offended and the Devas and spirits support us, 
throwing the world into confusion. Therefore, if one wants to convalesce quickly, he should recite the quintessential Mantra of Buddha 
Tsudor many times, read the profound Mahayana Siitras, perform 
the Ritual of Cleansing with Vase-\Vater, mark a circle round the 
village and confine people in it, offer white and red oblations and 
huge Dormas,7 deck the altars, dedicate the merits to all, and then 
make his wish. He who does all these things will soon be cured." 
Milarepa then went to Drin and said to the villagers, "I have had indications from a dream that the pestilence now prevailing in this area 
was caused by the local goddesses who are angry with you because you 
offended and injured them by the fires you kindled. In revenge they have 
spread the diseases. You should now perform suitable rituals and make 
various offerings." 
Thereupon, the villagers all prayed to the Gurus, the Buddhas, and 
the Guards of Dharma, offering them many oblations and huge Dormas, and dedicating these merits to the Devas and spirits. Through the 
infallible power of these prayers and blessings, the pestilence completely 
disappeared within a short time. 
On the 29th day of that month, the five Auspicious Ladies of Long 
Life, together with many of their followers and local deities, came to 
visit the Jetsun. They brought delicious food and excellent wine in jeweled beakers and offered them to Milarepa. After they had made obeisances to him and circled him many times, they stood in a row and said, 
"It is you, the Jetsun, who have saved our lives and cured our illnesses. 
You have been most gracious to us." Whereupon, with sweet voices they 
sang: 

--- PAGE 357 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
He who can foretell the fall of rain 
Knows how to observe the sky. 
When one sees that dark clouds gather, 
And the dragon thunders, 
He knows that the Dragon King will soon give rain 
To nourish all sentient beings. 
When slowly the rain drizzles, 
It shows that moisture and heat 
Are in balance on the earth. 
When the deafening thunder peals, 
It indicates the clashing conflict 
Between heat and cold. 
Under the flying clouds 
Stands a great snow mountain with three peaksThe central one is highest. 
A crown of crystal 
Is her head ornament; 
Starlight, soft and glimmering, 
Surrounds her in the serene night; 
The rays of sun and moon gleam upon her. 
Beauteous and resplendent was she fashioned. 
There our noble castle stands! 
By the left slope of the snow mountain 
Are the wondrous pastures of Medicine Valley. 
A canopy of rainbows ever hangs above it, 
Reflecting beams of glowing light. 
Lovely are the herbs grown in the valley, 
Here dance and play the local gods, 
Here lies the land of crops and fruitA garden full of lovely flowers. 
Your hut stands by the river bank, 
A place of great blessing, 
Where the great Yogi Mila dwells. 
Through the merits of your previous lives 
You receive a precious human body. 
By sloth unhindered 
You meditate without diversion. 
Thus, you have realized Mind-nature, the Unborn, 
And mastered the magic gestures. 
--- PAGE 358 ---
No obstacles and distractions can frighten you. 
Unshakeable as a mountain, 
You are a yogi of stability. 
Having mastered PraQa to perfection, 
You have no need of clothing, 
Exposing your body freely. 
By your grace and your devotions 
Many beings have been saved. 
At a time of defilement and distress 
You came to the red-faced country [of Tibet]! 
You are the glory of the world, 
Our shelter and our pride! 
[The leader of the four Oakinls continued to sing]: 
On the eleventh of this month 
I was hurt and sullied by smoke and fire. 
With great pain was my body wracked -
The unbearable torment tore at me. 
So I became most angry and malignant. 
Then I asked your help, and graciously you 
blessed me, 
Performing the Ritual of Cleansing. 
Also, you enlightened me 
On the Mind-Essence which is beyond both life 
and death. 
Of a sudden, I came to realize the Truth. 
Like clouds that vanish in the sky 
Ail my hurt was cleared away, 
My mind became fresh and alert, 
My body light as wool, 
So comfortable and well. 
The fevers left, health was restored, 
And my failing breath regained its strength. 
Thus the peril of death was overcome! 
Failing to complete their missions 
The agents of Death went back with shame. 
A great debt of gratitude I owe you, oh great Yogi! 
Though my birth is low and great my ignorance, 
My compassion small and inferior my mind, 
How can I forget he who saved my life? 
Tiii the end of it, 

--- PAGE 359 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
I shall ne'er forget this boon! 
Showing my deepest thanks 
I now offer you my magic powers. 
With loyalty confirmed 
I shall obey your teaching. 
From now until I win perfect Buddhahood 
I will consort with you; 
By the power of this sincere wish 
May I never leave you even for a second. 
As a shadow, may I follow in your steps. 
Like the five first disciples of Gauta~a Buddha, 
May we be the first disciples in your Pure Land, 
When you reach perfect Buddhahood. 
May we be the first to drink your nectar 
And become the children of Dharma. 
May we gather the clouds of the Four Actions8 
And rain down heavenly waters 
To nourish ignorant beings! 
Thus, in making their pure wishes, the Auspicious Fair Lady of Long 
Life led her four Oakini-sisters in singing this song. The Jetsun thought, 
"Now these malicious goddesses have shown their gratitude to me for 
healing their sickness. If I give them the preliminary Instructions of the 
Arising and Perfecting Yoga, they may be able to practice them." Then 
he said, "Fair ladies, with great sincerity you have now shown me your 
deep gratitude for the recovery of your health. Your words and attitude 
seem to have met the requirements for Tantric teaching. I intend to 
give you an Instruction, through which you may forever free yourselves 
from sufferings on the perilous path of Saf!lsara. But will you be able to 
practice it?" Milarepa then sang them a song, "The Growth of Joyfulness": 
Under the canopy of sunlight in the East 
Towers the propitious peak of Mount Menlha;9 
Like the head of a crystal eagle 
It reflects the glowing golden beams. 
The floating clouds are like a roof, 
And arched above it shines the rainbow. 
On the mountain's waist 
The gem-like rocks are girdled in dense fog. 
Is this not the great snow mountain, Queen of 
the Azure Heights? 

--- PAGE 360 ---
Residing on it are there not five wondrous ladies? 
In an enchanting voice 
One has just sung divinely. 
Is she not the Fair Lady of Long Life, 
Most sparkling and most glamorous? 
This time you are really frightened, 
For you have lost your pride! 
Your body was tom with agonizing pain, 
And your mind was full of grievances! 
Your breath was failing like a thinning mist, 
And your life was nearly at an end. 
All this was due to your past sinful deeds -
A bitter retribution of the Ripening Karma. 
If from these sinful deeds you do not refrain, 
Into the great Hell you may fall perchance. 
That is more dreadful than any sickness! 
That you did not die is fortunate, 
Praiseworthy that your seed of faith has grown. 
With great compassion have I blessed you. 
Through the great power of Tantra 
Have I saved you from the hand of Death. 
All despair and misfortune 
Has turned to good and boon. 
In joy you thanked me with deep gratitude, 
Which in many others would be lacking. 
In a charming voice 
You have sung sweetly with good meaning. 
Hearing it, I too feel glad and joyful. 
If you would follow my instruction 
Please listen and remember well: 
Painful is the path of Saf!lsara, 
Perilous and hard to cross 
Are the Four Rivers.10 
Dismal is the "forest" of Eight Strivings, 
Hard to escape are the triple Bardo's dangers. 
To live under the constant threat 
Of Four Devils11 is distressing. 
But here is a path of no-fear-

--- PAGE 361 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
An escape from all miseries, 
Leading to the Land of Bliss Eternal. 
I may not be superb, 
But my Lineage is supreme. 
From the great Dorje-Chang, the Sixth Buddha,12 
To my teacher, the Translator Marpa, 
All the Transmission Gurus are Nirmal)akayas. 
Never has a commoner corrupted the Lineage. 
Cherish then and value all my teachings! 
The stories of Medripa and Naropa are well known; 
You also must have heard their names before, 
As their fame is known all over India. 
Blessed by these two accomplished beings 
Is my father Guru, Marpa. 
Like a shadow to its body, 
I stayed close to him for six years and eight 
months. 
By following his orders faithfully, 
Joy and aspiration filled my heart. 
The profound Tantra Hevajra, the gracious Dem-Chog, 
The quintessential Tantra of Mahamaya, 
The lofty Tantra of Sungdue, 
The concealed Tantra of Den Yi, 
And the Nirmal)akaya of the SkullAll these vital Tantras 
And their commentaries, deep as the ocean, 
Were bestowed on me, 
A gift of precious gems. 
The Key-Instructions, essential and most pithy, 
Must be taught intimately, face to face. 
To master them one also needs to practice; 
Like an apprentice to a master goldsmith, 
One must learn the art of melting and alloying 
Gold, and how to stoke the fire. 
The vital teachings of Tantra 
Are also taught by word of mouth. 
Witnessed by Oakinis, I was given 
The Pith-Instructions of the Lineage. 
--- PAGE 362 ---
To my father Guru, I am forever grateful! 
To repay him, I practice meditation. 
By hard and steady work 
I have mastered the Five Pra!)as; 
With confidence I can perform the Action of 
Equality.1:1 
No longer do I fear the pains of sickness. 
Oh my daughter-disciples, 
If you also want to attain such joy 
Follow my words and footsteps. 
Enter now the Path, 
And you will soon be happy! 
The human body is beset with sickness, 
And trying to free one's mind from grief 
Often leads to more distress. 
By the force of Karma and the senses 
All self-made confusions are created. 
They are but dreams passing in a flash; 
Even Hell with all its torture through the aeons, 
Does not exist. 
From evil and habitual thoughts [within] 
Arise the pains without. 
This is the Final Truth 
Buddha Gautama preached to Dorje Ninpo. 
The whole Universe is but "imagination," 
All in all, it is but a shadow-show 
Of one's own mind. 
If one knows not this truth 
He may possess the world of Brahma 
But never can he win true happiness. 
The Four Dhyanas14 that for kalpas last 
Are on the lower path; 
Never can they bring one to Omniscient Buddhahood. 
Only through cultivating Bodhi-Mind 
And contemplating on the Void 
Can Karmas, troubles, hindrances, and habitual 
thoughts be killed. 
Oh well-endowed fair ladies, 
It is our lot to meet here today. 
Wear the armor of zeal 

--- PAGE 363 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
And abjure distraction! 
Your wishes for good soon will be fulfilled. 
Milarepa then said to the Oakinis, "Please think carefully about this 
song and its meanings and practice Dharma at once. You may think 
that the Four Bodies of Buddha are something beyond yourself, an 
exterior object or goal that you should strive to reach. But, in fact, 
there is no Buddha to be found outside of one's own mind. The 
Light-of-Death [or, the Light that shines at the moment of death] 
is the Dharmakaya; the [pure manifestation of] Bardo is the Sambhogakaya; the different births one takes are the Nirmlil)akayas; and 
the inseparable unity of the Trikaya is called the Body-of-Essence.111 
They are with us all the time, yet we are unaware of them. To unfold 
them, one must rely on the profound Pith-Instructions from an ac· 
complished Guru of an uninterrupted Lineage." 
The Fair Lady of Long Life then said, "When our Guru Padmasaqlbhava first came to Tibet from India, we all went to affiict him, but 
we were subdued by his powers and mighty gestures. Then we obeyed 
his orders and offered him our lives and service. We also besought him 
for the essential teachings of Tantra. From him we received instructions 
on the truth of Karma and other Dharmas and Siitras. At the Dark 
Noisy Cemetery18 in India we received great Initiations and Vajrayana 
teachings from Guru Shojigocha,11 and the Black Performer.18 Therefore, perhaps we may consider ourselves to be qualified to receive 
esoteric instructions. This time we have suffered greatly from illness. 
This painful lesson was so real and so frightening that we are convinced once and for all that never would we be able to endure the 
torment of Hell for a moment. The warnings in your song also impressed us deeply. So, pray protect us from these fears, cleanse us 
from all sins, and show us the way to Buddhahood." Whereupon, they 
sang: 
Floating in the bright firmament, 
The golden clouds by magic and wonder are created 
To adorn the Nagas' crowns. 
Under them, the lesser Devas, the Non-men, 
And the Fragrance-eating She-ghosts 
Dance and gaily sing, enjoying 
Sensuous pleasures with much laughter. 
Beneath those flying clouds 
Lies the lucky valley of Dinma. 
Its upper region is circled by snow ranges, 

--- PAGE 364 ---
Its lower part abounds in springs and brooks. 
In the center of this valley 
Grows a luxuriant meadow 
Where Devas sport and play. 
This brilliant Medicine Valley 
Is the Nagas' treasure house, 
Filled with fruit and honey. 
This is where four-footed creatures thriveA land of pastures, quiet and delightful. 
Near the river bank is a hut 
Wherein a wondrous yogi dwells. 
By merely hearing of his name, 
Or seeing his splendrous body, 
One's hindrances and sins are cleared. 
He works all miracles and Mudras. 
Having realized the Omniscient Mind, 
With mastership of Dharma-Essence, 
He preaches Voidness with compassionate voice. 
To him all Devas and spirits 
Should pray and give homage. 
Trust and reliance should one place in him. 
He is the son of Buddha, 
Who grants us all our wishes. 
Driven by deep-rooted ignorance, 
We worldly, magical ])akin is 
Wander in Saq1sara from time without beginning. 
First, we must take an earthly birth -
We have no other choice. 
Then we think we can live for long, 
But suddenly we hear the call of Death 
And our hands are tied -
We cannot escape. 
Dizzy are our heads and dark our thoughts. 
Without freedom from death, we must fade, 
And with us all our beauty and our splendor. 
When the living organs cease to function 
The awesome play of Bardo must begin. 
Along the fearful Bardo path 
Wanderers, confused and desolate, 

--- PAGE 365 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
Are chased by merciless demons. 
They are tom apart 
By anxiety and fear; 
By sinful acts and habitual thoughts 
They are driven away. 
Then, regardless of their wishes, 
They are reborn in a strange and foreign land. 
In the rolling ocean of Saqtsara we repeat 
The round of birth, old-age, sickness, and of death; 
No one yet has rescued us from drowning. 
Today you have given us the raft of Bodhi-Mind 
On which we shall escape the witch-land of desires, 
And elude the dreadful monster of the deep. 
Riding the gale of wrong thoughts 
We shall arrive safely 
In the Happy Land. 
From despair and weariness 
We shall revive; 
With hope and guidance, 
Will our wishes be fulfilled. 
In Saqtsiira's dark and fearful woods 
Roam ghostly beasts, our passions. 
Seeing them, in panic do we tremble. 
In this dark and thorny forest 
We have lost our way; 
Pray show us the path 
And deliver us in safety. 
As the bright. autumn moon 
Illumines the great earth, 
Enlighten, pray, our ignorance 
And grant us your guidance. 
In the dread Bardo path, 
Perilous and inescapable, 
Point out the dangerous traps. 
We have been enslaved by the Devil's band, 
And fettered in a dungeon by our acts; 
From this dread imprisonment 
We could not escape. 
But today we have met you, 
The Savior Guru whom none dare dispute. 
--- PAGE 366 ---
With your guidance and protection 
We will surely cross the road. 
Pray show us the way to Dharmakaya 
Through recognizing the Death Light.19 
Pray show us the way to Samboghagakaya 
Through recognizing Bardo's phantom forms. 
Pray show us the way to Nirmal)akaya, 
Thus letting us incarnate at our will! 
Beyond the fearful realm of the Three Bardos20 
Lies the Pure Land of No-rcgression.21 
Much have we heard of it 
But we have never been there. 
Oh compassionate Guru, savior merciful, 
Pray guide us to it now! 
Pray answer the cry for help 
From those in despair and grief. 
Pray now reveal to them 
The Fourfold Body of Buddhahood! 
Then they offered the Jctsun a silver mirror Mal)c;lala decorated with a 
golden lotus and various gems. The Jetsun said, "Since you have petitioned me so earnestly, I shall now bless you in the tradition of my 
Lineage. Please prepare a sacramental feast for the occasion." 
That evening the five Oakinis offered a Manc;lala filled with sixty different kinds of food to the Jetsun. He blessed and initiated them into 
'the order of the Inborn Mother22 of the Whispered Lineage, and then 
sang a song in which he gave them the instruction for identifying the 
perilous Bardo with the Trikaya, by means of which one delivers himself [forever from Saq~sara] to the Pure Land of Great Bliss: 
In the land of India, 
In the center of this earth, 
There is a great monastery, Bidrama23 called. 
A university is found therein 
Whence springs the fountain of all learning. 
There the professor of the Northern School 
Is the peerless Pal)c;lita, lion of men, 
A mighty champion who has 
Defeated every heretic. 
Is he not the great Naropa, 
Master of the four Tantras, 

--- PAGE 367 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
Master of both the mundane and the ultimate 
Accomplishment? 
The foremost son of this great PaQ<;lita 
Is my Father Guru, the Translator Marpa, 
A man with strong will and perseverance, 
A man of great fame, thunder-like. 
He said, "At the time of defilement, 
When declines the Buddha's teaching, 
Lives will be short and merits poor. 
Evils and hindrances, in myriad forms, 
Will o'ershadow all the world; 
Leisure and long life will become most rare; 
Knowledge will [expand] to a point 
Too stupendous to comprehend; 
Proofs and conclusions will be hard to reach. 
To understand the truth of Tantra will be 
most difficult. 
Therefore, my son, try nothing else, 
But work hard at the practice!" 
Following this injunction, 
I abjure indolence, and meditate 
With perseverance in my hermitage. 
Thus I have gained a few Experiences. 
Destined fair ladies, now listen with attention! 
Along the Path of the Three Existences24 
There is no end of wandering in SaiTlsara! 
Know then that the Six Dharmas of Bardo 
Are the root of all. 
[The following parables, 
Will explain the teaching of Bardo.] 
Three traveling [merchants], on a long journey, 
When in a perilous place sent out for help. 
When they saw their guides return with 
native welcomers 
They were o'erwhelmed with joy. 
Without reliable guides they would have lost 
Their way and fallen into the hands of enemies. 
--- PAGE 368 ---
If merchants go abroad without these three good 
guides25 
Fear and misgiving fill their minds; 
By false prophesies and revelations 
Three Devils lead them 
To a bandits' ambush. 
Thus wanderers in the dark Sidpa Bardo 
Will freeze and burn for nine and forty days, 
Driven by the force of Karma 
To Sarpsara's prison to return. 
If from this prison you would escape 
You should contemplate the Oneness 
Of the Sarpsara-Nirval)a Bardo, 
And meditate on the Root-principle, 
Truth Absolute, the Mahamudra. 
The Bardo of Birth-and-Death 
Is a good ground on which to drill the illuminating 
mind. 
Upon it one should practice the Arising and 
Perfecting Y ogas. 
The essence of the Bardo-of-the-Path 
Is that of Innate Wisdom. 
The Whispered Lineage practice will unfold it. 
The Bardo of Dream-and-Sleep is best 
To convert habitual thinking into Wisdom; 
Within it one should practice the Yogas 
Of Light and of the Phantom Body. 
At the end of the Sidpa Bardo 
The Three Bodies of Buddha will appear. 
This is the time to enter the Three Pure Lands.26 
If in Bardo one fails to realize Trikaya 
And time elapses till the lncarnation-Bardo27 
comes, 
By his faith and purity 
He can still be born in a land of fortune, 
His body well endowed with leisure. 
Because the Law of Causation never fails to bring 
what one deserves, 

--- PAGE 369 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
By waking from past Karma 
And perfecting meditation, 
He will gain Liberation soon! 
To you five wondrous maidens 
Who asked with sincerity and faith 
Is given this important Bardo teaching. 
Even if the Jetsun Marpa should Himself come here, 
He could give you no instruction more profound 
than this! 
The five Oakinis then prostrated themselves before the Jetsun and 
circumambulated him seven times. They offered him a Mal)c;lala made 
of precious stones; praised his body, word, mind, and merits; and finally 
made him the supreme-bliss-void offering of the Wisdom-of-Four-Blisses 
produced through the ecstasy of union. Then they said, "Your instructions on the Bardo are clear and comprehensive. Now please give us the 
pith of this teaching to make it easier for us to practice," and they sang: 
We pay homage to you, gracious Guru, 
The refuge of all sentient beings. 
With the teaching of the Whispered Lineage 
You have transformed our pains to joy, 
As by [a magician] iron is turned to gold. 
Pray, most holy Buddha, 
Always pity and protect us. 
Above the immaculate lotus 
Untarnished by Sa111saric soil, 
Your throne, oh Jetsun Guru, 
Illuminates the Void! 
A myriad Oakinis cloud around you; 
The sun and moon shine down on you, 
Illumining the absence of wavering thoughts! 
For your handsome face and radiant 
Body we feel insatiable, 
And desire to look once more. 
Beautiful, with well-proportioned features, 
You are like the son of the Victorious Ones. 
Seeing you, one feels joy and happiness. 
To the tune of Dri Za28 we sing 
A song of praise to you. 

--- PAGE 370 ---
Your voice is like the roaring 
Of a lion, great and mighty, 
Like the Dharma, clear yet void. 
Your voice frightens the devils and pagans 
And fulfills the wishes of the gifted ones. 
In the Ten Directions your fame will spread afar. 
Like a diamond, your mind cannot be broken; 
Like space it embraces all. 
From the sky of No-conception 
Shines the light of your Boclhi-Mind 
Emancipating disciples from darkness. 
Your body, word, and mind are like those of BuddhasFrom them spring all Accomplishments. 
If one thinks of you, the Wish-fulfilling Gem, 
All one's wishes will be fulfilled. 
If one worships you with earnestness, 
As the adorning crown-of-grace 
Upon his head, all his hopes will be fulfilled. 
If one prays to you wholeheartedly night and day 
Like a mighty king, you will grant 
All his requests. 
To you, the precious Jetsun, 
We pay homage and give praise. 
From the clouds of your compassion 
Falls the nectar rain of blessing; 
When the destined disciple drinks it 
He will conquer all his desires 
In this very life, and the seed 
Of Enlightenment will sprout within him. 
Reaching the Thirteenth Stage,20 
He will become the great Dorje-Chang. 
With your teachings, wisdom, and performance 
May all beings become filled and happy! 
May the flower of perfection bloom in joy! 
May we serve you as escorts on the Path, 
Till we reach the Ultimate Enlightenment. 
May we attain final Samadhi 
Through normal worldly rapture. 
By the Wisdom-of-Four-Blisses 

--- PAGE 371 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
May we stabilize the bliss-void Samadhi. 
As women of intelligence we are convinced 
Of the truth of the Middle Way. 
With joy we shall obey your orders, 
Pray grant us permission to serve you. 
At the close of this song we ask 
You for concise teaching on the Bardo. 
Pray grant us the instruction for realizing 
Buddha's Four Bodies 
At the time when death calls us. 
Nourished and fostered by your grace, 
May we win merits like yours. 
In this very life 
May we all attain perfect Enlightenment. 
The Jetsun continued: "Fair ladies! Driven by the three desires and 
flowing thoughts, sentient beings have been wandering down the endless 
road in the Three Realms, forever subjected to the Eight Deprivations. 
This journey is so long and hazardous that one feels very weary and exhausted. There are three different kinds of travelers on this road. The 
first have received, followed, and practiced the Instructions; the second 
have also received but have not practiced them; while the third have not 
even the Instructions. The first kind do not fear or worry about the 
dangers of the road nor about the traps of demons, because by practicing the Dharma they are able to vanquish all these fears. The third 
kind are ordinary people who spontaneously enter the perilous path, and 
are automatically seized by the devils-of-Karma. They will undergo all 
the pains of birth and death, and wander in the Three Realms of Sarpsara forever. The second kind have the same fears and hazards as the 
third. But they have received the Instructions and have learned to recognize and fight against evil influences; and so, if they have an unshakeable faith towards [Buddha] and an understanding and aspiration for the Dharma together with the armor of unyielding diligence, 
they may slowly and gradually recognize the Trikaya of Buddha by 
observing carefully how the senses and elements subside [at the time. 
of death]. You ask me about the teaching of realizing the Trikaya. 
You should know that at the time of death, when the outer and 
inner elements successively subside, the [consciousness] of the dying 
man will be [temporarily] set free from the string of Kle~as. The 
absolute Reality, the essence of the voidness of Dharmadhatu beyond 

--- PAGE 372 ---
all thought, will unfold itself, shining bright as the sun and moon 
in the sky. This is the Light-of-Death, or the Dharmakaya itself. One 
should recognize it as it is. But to do so at the time of death, a man 
must first understand the nature of Mind in the way his Guru pointed out during his lifetime, and also practice the Illuminating Lightof-the-Path.30 In the perilous path of the Sidpa Bardo, the wanderer 
will be pursued and attacked by 'executioners' who are, in fact, created by his own previous Karmas and thoughts. These 'mind-created body-forms' are luminous, their organs are complete, and they 
possess the miraculous powers of a mundane karmic nature, which include the ability to pass through material objects, [telepathy,} and so 
forth. The Bardo body of this stage is, in fact, identical with the Sambhogakaya. At this time one should invoke the magic-like two-in-one 
Buddha Body [to replace and purify] the karmic Bardo body created by 
habitual thoughts, and thus recognize the Sambhogakaya as it is. To recognize this Sambhogakaya in the Bardo stage, one should practice the 
Arising Yoga and clearly visualize the Patron Buddha's Body during his 
lifetime, and also practice the Dream Yoga, to master the [manifestation] of the Phantom Body. At the final stage of Bardo, driven by the 
winds of Karma and Blindness and having no choice whatsoever, he 
searches for somewhere to incarnate. When he watches sex intercourse 
between [his future] mother and father, hate [towards one] and lust 
[toward the other] rises in him. But if at this time he can remember the 
Pith-Instructions, and enter the void-bliss experience [of Samadhi] and 
remain there, then karmic and worldly thoughts will not arise again. 
When he intends to incarnate he should think and observe that all he 
sees are manifestations of the Nirmfu)akaya Buddha, and recognize the 
Nirmal)akaya as it is. 
"In order to be able to recognize the Nirmal)akaya, one should, in his 
present life, endeavor to arouse [transcendental] Wisdom through practising the Heat Yoga of the Liberation Path and the Karma Mudra of 
the Path-of-Love. Only then will he be able to realize the full meaning 
of the Third lnitiation31 and thus vanquish [instinctive] jealousy. In 
brief, one must know well the different stages and times [in the Bardo 
state] in order to realize the fruit of the Trikaya. Even the ultimate 
Pointing-out Instruction of the Whispered Lineage -
the core of the 
Skillful Path, the most cherished prize in Marpa's heart- can give you 
no profounder instructions than this. I have no better and no more convincing teaching than this to rely on and confide. So, fair ladies, appreciate what I say, follow, and practice it." 
The Fair Lady of Long Life, the leader of the [Fourl Oakinis, was 
greatly inspired by these profound Instructions of the Skillful Path, and 
her faith was confirmed. She bowed down at the feet of Milarepa and 

--- PAGE 373 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
said, "Oh Jetsun! From now on I will follow you and practice Karma 
Mudra with you until I have consummated my Experience and Realization of this quintessential Bardo instruction. Please always remembex 
and look after me." Praying to him with great sincerity and earnestness, 
the Oakini again made obeisances and circumumbulated him many 
times. Then she returned to her own abode. 
This is the story of the Great Repa Mila, the Laughing Vajra, and 
his meeting with the five worldly, magical Oakinis, including the songs 
of inquiry and answer known as the "Golden Rosary," in which are 
found the instructions for emancipation from the perilous Bardo. 
This is the story of the gracious Guru, 
The accomplished, Gem-like Repa, 
His meeting with five worldly Oakinis of low birth, 
And their songs of inquiry and his answers. 
It is written with garlanded words 
As a song containing 
The profound hidden teaching of the ToagaJ.32 
I have not added to this story 
For fear of losing and forgetting it; 
But for the benefit of disciples in the future 
And to inspire their joy, 
I have written this tale 
In my Guru's words. 
Three times did I seek my Guru's permission 
To write this book. 
He smiled at me, [but] did not grant it 
Until the third time. 
I dare not violate the rules 
Because the Oakinis are most severe and strict. 
My Guru says this story should be told 
Only to great yogis in the future 
As a reference for their devotions; 
But from others it must be secret kept. 
Lest I violate the Oakinis' rules and wishes 
I now sincerely pray to them 

--- PAGE 374 ---
To conceal this story from those 
[Who cannot profit by it], 
And never let it widely spread. 
When Buddha Sakyamuni won Enlightenment, 
In the latter part of the [month) 
In which he worked miracles, 
I, Auijee Thajan, and the Guru Bodhi Radsa, 
In a tamarisk grove where wild beasts roam, 
Asked our Elder Brother, perfect in the Tantric 
precepts, 
In detail aboutthis story, 
And wrote it down in words. 
It is "The Song of the Golden Rosary" 
On how to free oneself from the perilous Bardo. 
I now dedicate the merit of writing it 
To the emancipation of all beings 
From fear and danger in the Bardo. 
At the request of the five Shajhamas,33 the Fair Lady of Long Life 
and her sisters, the instruction for freeing one from the perilous path 
of Bardo was given by the peerless Yogi, the great Milarepa. After 
careful discussions, the two Repas put it down in words as a service 
and offering to the Dharma. 
NOTES 
1 Rainbow-like Body of the Mind (T.T.: hJah.TshonJTa.Buhi.Yi.Kyi.sKu.): 
This term is not an established or often-used term in ·Tibetan Tantrism. It was 
perhaps created by the author to denote the illuminated "mental body" of an accomplished yogi, usually known as hJah.Lus.- the Rainbow Body. 
2 These are free translations of the diseases' names. Because of their obscurit}, it is difficult to identify the equivalent medical terms. 
3 The Tibetans believe that smoke caused by a forest or mountain fire will 
usually injure or affiict the local deities. Thus, in revenge these deities will spread 
germs of disease in the region. 
4 The Hundred-Words Cleansing Ritual (T.T.: YLGe.brGya.Pahi.Khrus.Chog.): 
This is the cleansing ritual of the Vajrasattva whose main Mantra consists of one 
hundred words. 
5 The Victorious Mother of the Crown (T.T.: gTsug.Tor.Nam.Par.rGyal. 
Ma.): a Tantric goddess who can bestow great powers of attraction; 

--- PAGE 375 ---
Guiding Instructions on the Bardo 
6 \Vorldly Qakinis (T.T.: hJig.rTen.mKhah.hGro.Ma.): Qakinis are not necessarily all enlightened and hcnc,·olcnt beings. vVorldly Qiikinis arc local goddesses, or fairies who, like ordinary human beings, are still bound by desires and passions. 
They are by no means holy or divine. See Story 29, Note 8. 
7 Dormas (T.T.: gTor.l\.Ia.): In making the various oblations for Tantric rituals, Tibetan lamas have developed a highly sophisticated art of making these oblation objects from baked flour dough. Using this material as the main ingredient, 
together with additional decorative articles and figurines, Tibetan lamas can make 
up a great variety of oblations called Donnas. 
8 Four Actions (T.T.: bsDus.\Va.rNam.bShi.; Literal translation: "Four Cooperative Acts"): These arc the four Bodhisattva's virtues (Skt.: Catuh-samgrahavastu). They are (I) to give the things that others like to receive; (2) to say the 
pleasant words that others like to hear; ( 3) to do profitable deeds for sentient beings; and (4) to adapt oneself under all circumstances for the benefit of sentient 
beings. 
9 Menlha (T.T.: sMan.lHa.): a holy place in Tibet. 
I 0 Four Rivers: a symbolic term denoting the pains of birth, old-age, sickness, and death, that, like hazardous rivers, arc difficult to cross. 
II Four Devils: the Devils of Illness, of Interruption, of Death, and of Desires. 
12 Sixth Buddha: Counting clockwise, the first four Buddhas in a 
Mat:~<:lala, 
starting from the East, arc (I) Buddha Yairocana, East; (2) Buddha Ratnasambhava, South; (3) Buddha Amitiibha, \Vest; and (4) Buddha Amoghasiddhi, North. 
The fifth Buddha, Vajrasattva, occupies the center place, and the sixth, Yajradhara 
(Tib.: Dorje-Chang) sits in the center ahm·e Vajrasattva. Dorjc-Chang is the source 
and center of all the other five. Chronologically He is the First Buddha. The socalled Sixth Buddha is, therefore, a very misleading term created because of the 
Oriental habit of counting in the direction starting from the East. 
13 Action of F.qnality (T.T.: Ro.si\loms.Kyi.~:Pyod.Pa.): 'When a yogi reaches 
the advanced stage he is able to "equalize" fear and hope, joy and pain, evil and virtue, etc. I le is then no more affected by polarity, and begins to equalize and unify 
the opposing forces as manifested in dualism. 
14 The Four Dhyanas: These denote the Four Formless Dhyanas, i.e., the 
Dhyanas of Infinite Space, of Infinite Consciousness, of Nothingness, and of Neither Consciousness nor Non-ConsciOusness. 
15 Body-of-Essence (T.T.: i\lo.\Vo.i\lid.Kyi.sKu.): The complete name for this 
term should be "Body of the Universal Essence" (T.T.: Chos.d\Vyiii.J\Io.Wo.J\Iid. 
Kyi.sKu.), which is the unity, or the indivisible aspect of the Trikaya. This term 
seems to he found only in the Tantric literature, and is criticized by some Buddhist 
scholars as senseless and redundant, since its characteristics have been well covered by the tenets of the Dharmakaya. 
16 Dark Noisy Cemetery (T.T.: Mun.Pa.sGra.sGrogs.). 
I i. Guru Shojigocha (T.T.: sLoh.dPon.Phyogs.Kyi.Go.Cha.). 
18 Black Performer (T.T.: sPyod.Pa.Nag.Po.). 
19 Death Light (T.T.: hChi.Bahi.IIod.Zer.): the light of the Dhannakaya that 
shines forth at the time of death. 
20 The Three Bardos: (1) Chikhai Bardo (the Bardo at the moment of 
death); (2) Chiinyid Bardo (the Bardo of Reality); (3) Sidpa Bardo (the Bardo 
of Rebirth). See "The Tibetan Book of the Dead," 3rd ed., edited by W. y, 
Evans-Wentz, Oxford University Press, 1957. 

--- PAGE 376 ---
21 The Pure Land of No-Regression: Buddha's Pure Land is said to be immune from all adverse conditions that may pull one back from his progress on the 
spiritual Path, therefore it is also known as the Pure Land of No-Regression. 
22 Inborn Mother (T.T.: IIIan.Cig.sKycs.Ma.): another m:me for Dorje Pagmo, 
who symbolizes the Inborn Wisdom of Buddhahood. 
23 Bidrama (T.T.: Bi.Kra.Ma.): This is probably a corruption of the word 
Vikramasila (Monastery). 
24 Three Existences: .These arc the Existences of Life, of Death, and of Bardo. 
2 5 The names of the so-called "three guides" are not mentioned in the text, 
and the translator is not certain about them. 
26 The Three Pure Lands: Judging from the context, the Three Pure Lands 
in question seem to be the Pure Lands of the Dharrnakaya, of the Sambogakaya, 
and of the Nirmanakaya. But th1s locution is rather unusual, and lacks sufficient -reason. "It is acceptable in Mahayana Buddhism to say that there is a Pure Land of the 
Sambhogakaya or a Land of the Nirma~akaya, but it would be difficult to accept 
the idea of a Land of the Dharmakaya, which is formless and void. The translator 
presumes that this locution is merely an embarrassing sacrifice to style, caused by 
the Procrustean approach of the trisymmctrical form adopted in this song. 
27 The Incarnation-Bardo (T.T.: sKye.gNas.brGyud.Pahi.Bar.Do.): commonly 
known as the Srid.Pa. Bardo. 
28 Dri.Za.: the Smell Eater. It is said that most of the spirits, or metamorphosis-born beings, are fed on odors. This is true of Devas, Asuras, and ghosts. 
29 The Thirteenth Stage: Generally, Mahayanists accept only ten progressive 
enlightenment stages of a Bodhisattva, known as the Ten Bhiimis; passing the tenth 
stage, Buddhahood is then reached. Therefore, Buddhahood is considered as the 
eleventh stage. But according to some Tantrists, the Supreme Vajra-Buddhahood is 
still two steps beyond the general eleventh stage. Thus, the stage of Dorje-Chang is 
considered as the Thirteenth Stage- a very controversial topic in Tantric Buddhism. 
30 The Illuminating Light-of-the-Path (T.T.: Lam.Gyi.Hod.Zer.): This is the 
Wisdom-Light a yogi sees on the Path (or during his meditation practice). Altogether there are three kinds of "Lights": (1) The Light of Origin, or the Mother 
Light (T.T.: Mahi.Hod.Zer.); (2) The Light of the Path, or the Light of the Son 
(T.T.: Lam.Gyi.Hod.Zer.); and (3) The Light of Fruit, or the Light of Union 
(T.T.: hBras.Buhi.Hod.Zer.). 
31 The Third Initiation: Third Initiation is also called the Wisdom Initiation (T.T.: Ye.<;es.Kyi.dWan.) During this initiation the disciple is shown the 
truth of the unity of bliss and voidness by the symbol of sexual union. 
32 Toagal (T.T.: Thod.rGal.): This is the advanced teaching of the Great 
Perfection of the Ningmaba School, which is quite different .and unique in comparison with the Yogic teachings of the New Schools of Tibetan Tantrism. This is 
a type of "Light Yoga," stressing the functional or manifestating aspect of the 
"Innate Light." Literature of this Yoga has so far never been translated into any 
Western language. 
33 Shajhama (T.T.: Phyag.rGyag.Ma.): the female yogi who helps one in the 
practice of the Third Initiation Yoga. 

--- PAGE 377 ---
TSERINMA AND THE 
MUDRA PRACTICE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
L
ATE on the night of the eighth day of the Month of the Fire 
Chicken, a great light shone upon Milarepa's quiet hermitage in 
Chu Bar.1 Milarepa then sensed a fragrant odor he had never smelled 
before and heard the sound of approaching voices. While he was wondering about them, the Auspicious Lady of Long Life (Tserinma], welldressed and wearing beautiful ornaments, appeared with her sistersone bringing various kinds of incense; one, many delicious foods and 
drinks; one, musical instruments; another, fine and pretty clothes; and 
still another, beautiful flowers. They all bowed down before the Jetsun, circumambulated him many times, and offered him desirable oblations conjured by their miraculous powers. Then they sang in chorus: 
Oh perfect, precious, destined and well-endowed 
Guru, 
Is "Laughing Vajra" the name that Buddhas and 
Gurus call you? 
Did not your parents name you "Toubagha,''2 
While people call you "The Great Accomplished 
Repa"? 
Are you not the one with three wondrous names? 
To the left of the mountain, Lhaman Jalmo, 
Stands your hut by the bank of Lodahan River. 
The King of the Nagas sounded 
His magic conch-shell trumpet, 
And into a wish-fulfilling Palace 
Was this hut transformed. 
--- PAGE 378 ---
On this river-bank in Medicine Valley, 
You, a wondrous yogi, 
Industriously practice the Pinnacle Teachings. 
Renouncing the Eight Worldly Desires, 
From SaqJ.sflric temples you are freed. 
Through our wondrous powers 
We five girls have come 
To praise and sing for you 
With sweet words and tuneful voices. 
We represent the four known types of womanhood 
Called Lotus, Conch, Mark, and the Elephant.3 
Pray practice Karma Mudra with us. 
Will you grant our prayer? 
Do you know well 
The four techniques of Karma Mudra 
Called falling, holding, turning back, and 
spreadingIf so, you may apply them now, 
For your servants are prepared. 
It is said in the Supreme Tantra, 
[That the qualified yogi] should attract the 
maids of Heaven, 
Of Nagas, of Asuras, or of human kind. 
It also says that of all services 
The best is Karma Mudra. 
Thus we come here this evening. 
Pray witness this, oh great Yogi, 
Whose naked body is full of splendor 
and radiance. 
The Jetsun answered: 
At this late hour 
I hear your tuneful voices raised, 
And your thoughts expressed in song. 
[From whence come you, fair ladies?] 
Does not your abode 
Stand on the shining summit, 
The Snow Mountain's crystal peak? 
Towers not a palace 
Under the canopy of clouds 
'Midst the flower-galaxy of stars? 

--- PAGE 379 ---
Tserinma and the Mudra Practice 
Long are your lives and great your powers -
This of your mercy is the meed. 
Your fortune rivals that of the God of WealthThis of your bounty is the meed. 
Your servants are faithful and obedient -
This of your patience is the meed. 
In practicing meritorious deeds 
You are full of aspirationThis is the sign of your diligence. 
The fact that you have met me in this life 
Proves your good wishes in past lives. 
I sing this song for you 
To reveal the deep relationship. 
I am a follower of Nampa's Lineage, 
Who has mastered Pral)a and Bindu. 
'Tis true that of all offerings 
A qualified Mudra is the best. 
Most wondrous indeed are the four perfected 
Mudriis. 
The radiant Face and Lotus promote bliss; 
The shell·shaped Nac;li speeds the ecstasy; 
The Mark in the deep recess prevents all waste; 
While through the "Elephant" Reality is realized. 
You are the auspicious, noble, and fault-free 
Lady of Long Life. 
In your secret Wisdom Lotus 
Lies the bija,4 "Bham" shaped like the sign "e"; 
The male gem is likened to the blue bija "Hum"; 
And, when combined with "Pad," fixes 
TigLewell. 
When Wisdom and Skill together join 
The Bliss of Two-in-One is offered best. 
The Four Blisses and Four Moments are 
The essence of the Four Bodies of Buddha. 
Like the crawling of a tortoise 
[Slowly Tig Le] should drip down . 
. Then hold it in the Central Channel, 
And like a coursing beast, 
--- PAGE 380 ---
Reverse it [to the head]. 
Later when you spread it, 
Use the Liberating Mudra. 
"Tig" is Nirvana Path! 
"Le" the Bliss of Equality; 
"Las"5 means the various actions and plays, 
"Kyi" the intercourse 'twixt Bliss and Voidness; 
"Phyag" is this and that to hold; 
And "rGya," to embrace Nirvana and Samsara. 
"Las" is to contact this and act on that, 
"Kyi" to do this and that for the associate; 
"Phyag" is the Union of the Bliss and Void; 
While "rGya" is not to go beyond. 
This is the speed-path of Union, 
A path full of retained-bliss, 
A path to consummate the accomplishment 
Of the Illuminating-Void, 
Leading toward undiscriminating Dharmakaya, 
Directing one to the perfect Sambhogakaya, 
And leading to the Manifesting-Void of the 
NirmaQakayas. 
This is a path of bliss- of voidness, of no 
thoughts, and of two-in-one, 
A path of quick assistance by a goddess. 
Following this inspiring way 
You, fair ladies, will reach Liberation, 
And, in the Realm of No-arising will remain. 
Oh gifted fairies, you are indeed well qualified! 
The Karma Mudra was then performed, during which the five goddesses offered Milarepa their bodies, words, and minds - also many 
foods and drinks to please him. 
Among the five Oakinis - the Auspicious Lady of Long Life, the 
Drogmanzulema of Lashi Snow Mountain, the Mannmo of Linpa 
Draug, the Tsomanma of Nepal, and the Yidagmo of Y olmo Snow 
Mountain8 -
the Auspicious Lady of Long Life was the one who gained 
the best Karma Mudra inspiration from the Jetsun. 
This is the story of how the Repa, "Laughing Vajra," the great Yogi 
who was capable of attracting and using goddesses for his Mudra practice, met with the Lady of Long Life; and in which the songs of in-

--- PAGE 381 ---
Tserinma and the Mudrii Practice 
quiry and the answers, named "The Rosary of Bliss-Void Wisdom," 
are found . 
. After sincere prayers and offerings to the Deities, the two brother 
yogis- the compilers of this story- received a delightful revelation of 
permission, upon which the story was written. 
Samaya Ja Ja Ja! [Warning: Secret! Secret! Secret!) 
The story of the Lady of Long Life and Milarepa, including several preachings of Mila and the requests of the five Pakinls, was compiled and preserved by Ahtsarya Bodhi Radsa and Repa Shiwa Aui .. 
This is the end of this wondrous account, composed of three successive stories. 
NOTES 
Lit.: " .... in the quiet dwelling, the Palace of the Nim1iiJ;~akaya of Chu 
Bar." 
2 Toubagha (T.T.: Thos.Pa.dGah.): Milarepa's first name, given him by his 
father. See W. Y. Evans-Wentz' "Tibet's Great Yogi Milarepa." 
3 The four different types of Shajhama, or women qualified to serve as "Mudriis." "Shell," "Mark," "Lotus," and "Elephant," are all figurative terms designating the various patterns of physical make-up of the Shajhamas. 
4 Bija means the seed, core, or Essence of a Mantra. 
5 Karma Mudra is translated in Tibetan as "Las.Kyi.Phyag.rGya." "Las" is 
equivalent to the Sanskrit word "Karma," meaning Action; "Kyi" is a preposition 
meaning "of," and "Phyag.rGya." is the equivalent of "Mudra," meaning symbol 
or gesture. "Las.Kyi.Phyag.rGya." can thus be translated literally as "Action of Symbolic Teachings Practiced Through Concrete Actions." It is customary in Tibetan 
poetry, to break down a phrase and use its every component word to begin a line, 
thus making the poem more illustrative. 
6 Compared with Story 29, the names do not correspond. However, the translator presumes these are different names for the same Dakinis- one series being 
their formal names and the other, designations given according to the places from 
which they came. 

--- PAGE 382 ---
~,, 
ADMONISHMENT TO 
REPA DORJE WONSHU 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A
T ONE time when the Jetsun Milarepa was living in the Regba 
Dhujen Cave of Dinma Orin, he gave instructions to his disciples 
and patrons and set them to meditating; as a result they all gained 
good Experiences. 
Among the disciples there was a very industrious young man, a 
descendant of the Tiger Tribe.1 His deep faith in the Jetsun was confirmed when Realization had dawned upon him. In an assembly he 
said, "Dear Jetsun, when I think of the miseries of Sarpsara and the 
happiness of Liberation, I cannot sit in idleness for a single moment. 
Please accept me as your servant and I will meditate day and night 
with you. Also, when I think of your merits and the noble deeds of 
the Gurus in our Linage, all worldly merits and virtues become trifling 
and worthless. Pray, therefore, grant me the quintessential teachings 
of the Dharma." 
In reply Milarepa sang: 
My Lineage is the Lineage of Dorje-Chang, 
My great-grandfather was the noble Tilopa, 
My grandfather was the great PaJJc;lita Naropa, 
My father is Marpa the Translator, 
I am the Yogi Milarepa. 
These, with the fountainhead of profound Instructions, 
Make the six mainstays of my background. 
Now I shall tell you of the "Six Deceptions": 
Monasteries are like collecting-stations 
For hollow driftwood-
--- PAGE 383 ---
Admonishment to Repa Dorje W onshu 
Though they claim 
That the priestly life is divine and pure, 
It is deceptive and illusory to me; 
Of such companions I have no need! 
I am a man who cherishes peace of mind 
And abhors all gossip and accusations! 
When the Duma-heat is kindled within, 
All woolen clothes are useless; 
Of burdensome robes I have no need, 
And for disheartening housework I have no desire. 
When detestation arises within, 
All things and possessions lose their worth; 
For business I have no appetite; 
· 
For accumulating wealth I have no desire. 
\Vhen perseverance and industry grow within, 
Sons and disciples cease to be important; 
I have no need for meetings and visitors 
For they would merely interrupt devotion. 
When the Pith-Instructions are practiced, 
Dharma preachings lose significance; 
Since they only incite one's pride, 
I have no need for books and learning! 
This is the Song of the Six Deceptions 
In which the Pith-Instructions may be found. 
Think on it, and bear it well in mind. 
"This is indeed wonderful," said the young disciple. "Now, for the 
sake of ignorant sentient beings like us, I pray you to sing a song relating to your own Six l\1erits and Greatnesses." Milarepa then sang: 
Seldom in my life have I boasted of "greatness," 
But for praising the greatness of the Lineage 
I now sing the Song of the "Six Greatnesses": 2 
Great is the benevolence of Gurus and Buddhas! 
Great is the grace of Yidhams and Deities! 
Great is the power and might of the Protectors! 

--- PAGE 384 ---
Great are the oral instructions of the Whispered 
Lineage 
Great is Mila's perseverance, 
And great the faith of his disciples! 
Now I shall sing the Song of the "Six Joys": 
Joy it is to stay in the land of no-man; 
Joy it is to think of my Guru's instruction; 
Joy it is to sit on the hard cushion beneath me; 
Joy it is to remain in the solitary cave; 
Joy it is to meet hunger and cold with 
indifference; 
Joy it is to practice the Krunkol Exercises.3 
Now I shall sing of the "Six Gatherings": 
In the daytime people gather here 
And at night the Oakinis come. 
Morning and evening, food and clothes are 
brought. 
The Wheels-of-Bodhi gather in my living soul, 
The outer world and my mind gather into one. 
Now I shall sing of my "Six Keeps": 
In Ragma I have a keep called "Bodhi-Practice," 
In the Red Rock Gem Valley I own the "Eagle 
Keep," 
On the summit of Red Rock is my "Sky Keep," 
In the Moo region there's the "Tiger Cave 
and Lion Keep." 
Also I have the "Plantain Keep" of Kadaya Crystal 
Cave, 
And at White Horse-Tooth Rock I have the 
"Central Keep." 
Now I shall sing cf the "Six Goodnesses of 
Mila": 
Good is the view of Mahamudra, 
Good is the practice of the Six Yogas of Naropa, 
Good is the profound practice of the Skillful 
Path, 
Good is the inborn fruit of the Trikaya, 
Good is the grace of the Ghagyuba Sages, 
Good are the Pith-Instructions of Milarepa. 

--- PAGE 385 ---
Admonishment to Repa Dorje W onshu 
Oh faithful patrons and disciples, 
Evildoers are many, but virtue-practicers are 
few. 
All sufferings are of sins the retribution, 
All joys of virtues are the meed, 
Yet both are due to all that one has done. 
{..et us now make a vow to meet 
Again and again in future times! 
Hearing this song, all the disciples and patrons were very much impressed and pleased. They then left for their homes. The young man, 
however, was taken as a servant-disciple by the Jetsun. Later he became one of the close-sons of Milarepa, and was known as Daugom 
Repa Dorje Wonshu. 
This is the story of Repa Dorje Wonshu. 
NOTES 
1 Tiger Tribe (T.T.: Rus.sTag.). 
2 The Tibetan text, on folio 172, mentions only five Greatnesses. This could be 
a "copygraphical" error. The translation is based on the corrected version of the fifth 
Greatness. 
3 Krunkol Exercises {T.T.: hKhrul.hKhol.): Various specially designed physical exercises to further a yogi's meditation progress, and to overcome the hmdrances that he may encounter in his Yoga practice. 

--- PAGE 386 ---
MILAREPA'S MEETING 
WITH DHARMA BODHI 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A
T THE time when Milarepa was setting in motion the Wheel of 
Dharma at the Belly Cave of Nya Non with Rechungpa and his 
other son-disciples, there were five contemporary, great accomplished 
yogis. They were the Gurus Tsem Chin of La Dud, Dhampa Sangje 
of Dinrin, 1 Shilabharo of Nepal, Dharma Bod hi of India, and Milarepa of Nya Non. 
Once Dharma Bodhi was invited by Shilabharo to Bhalbo Dson to 
preach the Dharma. Many Tibetans as well as Nepalese went to pay 
homage to him. A number of Milarepa's disciples also wanted to go. 
Rechungpa gave many reasons to Milarepa, urging him to visit Dharma 
Bodhi. In answer to his request, Milarepa sang: 
By the Gurus' grace 
Many accomplished Sages come. 
The wondrous Dharma thus spreads far, 
And with joy are blessed all living beings. 
Many pilgrims paying homage to the Sages 
Show that a few destined persons will emerge. 
The Dhampa Sangje of Dinri, 
The Guru Tsem Chin of La Dud, 
The Shilabharo of Nepal, 
The Dharma Bodhi of India, 
And the Milarepa of Gung TangAll have attained the Wisdom. 
Each has succeeded in meditation, 
Each knows the Illuminating Mind-Essence. 
--- PAGE 387 ---
Milarepa's Meeting with Dharma Bodhi 
They all are capable of working miracles, 
They all possess the overflowing Void-Compassion, 
They all work wonders and produce amusing marvels. 
As to the spontaneous making of songs, 
I am the best of all the five; 
My perseverence and austerity are also greater; 
Nothing special or superb have they. 
I see no need to go; 
But you, my sons and disciples, 
Should do so by all means! 
It is not because I think ill of them 
[That I remain behind] 
But merely that I am too old to journey [there]. 
I now make a sincere wish that I may meet 
Them in the Pure Land of Oujen. 
Oh my son, do not be bewildered, 
But have confidence [in me]. 
Rechungpa said, "If you do not go, people will think that you are 
proud and jealous, and they will so accuse you with much reviling. By 
all means, please go!" In reply, Milarepa sang: 
I pray you, ye accomplished Beings 
To cleanse all sins and evil-doing. 
He who cares what people say 
Will only make himself confused. 
Journeying to many places 
Merely hinders one's devotion. 
Meddling in too many things 
When visiting a holy Guru 
Will confuse and irritate the consorting Deities. 
Treading the Path of the deep Tantra, 
Should one's mind divided be, 
Never can he attain accomplishment. 
Great is the blessing of the Accomplished Ones, 
But too many visitors produce ill will. 
However, Rechungpa, do go to see 
Him with your brothers [if you so wish]. 
Rechungpa replied, "[Your unwillingness to go will directly cause] 
people to commit sinful deeds. And so please go! We will also be greatly benefited if you will grant our request." After such persistent en-

--- PAGE 388 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREI'A 
treaties, Milarepa finally gave in, saying, "All right. In that case let us 
go to greet Dharma Bodhi." Upon the Jetsun's consent, Rechungpa 
and the other disciples all cried for joy. They said, "Indians all like 
gold; therefore we should obtain some for him as a token of our welcome." In commenting on their suggestion, Milarepa then sang: 
I pray you, ye accomplished Beings, 
To remove the cravings of this poor mendicant; 
I pray that all my deeds may accord with the 
Dharma! 
Why practice the Bodhi-Mind 
If one's acts are in conflict with the Dharma? 
He who has attained Samadhi 
Ne'er needs a companion! 
He who has experienced self-liberation 
Ne'er needs a consort! 
Else what would be the use and meaning 
Of his long work in meditation? 
If I, Milarepa, pursue gold, 
My renunciation will be pointless. 
Dharma Bodhi wants no gold, 
Else his accomplishment would be valueless. 
Dordrag Rechungpa wants no profit, 
Else his apprenticeship would be meaningless. 
The Jetsun continued, "You go first- I shall follow you." Thus he 
dispatched them. On their way, in doubt, they all thought, "Will the 
Jetsun really come?'' With this misgiving, as they approached Bhalbo 
Dson, lo and behold! Milarepa, who had transformed his body into a 
pagoda, [suddenly] descended in the midst of them like a shootingstar falling from the sky. Seeing this miracle, Dharma Bodhi was very 
much impressed, and all Milarepa's disciples were struck with great 
surprise and joy. The whole party then approached Dharma Bodhi, 
who was surrounded by crowds of people. Seeing Milarepa and his 
disciples coming, Dharma Bodhi of India at once descended from his 
seat and prostrated himself tlefore Milarepa of Tibet. Thereupon, peo· 
pie all thought that Milarepa must be even greater than Dharma Bodhi; 
but they were also confirmed with a faith that both men were no different from the perfect Buddha. The two accomplished beings then 
sat together on one seat and conversed joyfully with each other. 
Dharma Bodhi said to Milarepa, "I am very pleased that you always 
remain in solitude. This is indeed remarkable." In reply to this praise, 
the Jetsun sang: 

--- PAGE 389 ---
Milarepa's Meeting with Dharma Bodhi 
I pray you, ye Nirmal)akaya Gurus, 
For blessings from the Accomplished Ones 
of the Whispered Lineage! 
To Dharma Bodhi of India and the gifted 
Tibetans and Nepalese assembled here, 
I, Milarepa, the Yogi of Tibet 
Sing a song of Wisdom Experiences, 
Lest people fail to recognize an accomplished 
being. 
The Five Twisted Nac;lis are straightened by 
Pral)a-Practice, 
The Five Winding Pral)as are straightened by 
the Taming Practice, 
The Five Sullied Elements are burned out, 
And all Five trunks of the poisonous PassionMind are overthrown. 
In the Central Channel the savage 
Karmic wind of errant thoughts is pacified. 
Now there is no need for me 
To entangle myself with evil companions. 
Dharma Bodhi then said, "The way you have conquered the 'adversaries' is indeed wonderful. Now please tell me of some good meth· 
ods to this end." In response, Milarepa sang: 
I pray to all accomplished Beings, 
I pray that, through your blessing, 
A companion may be found within me. 
When the Mother of the Five Pure Na<;l\s 
Meets the Father of the Five Pure Pral)as, 
The Five Sons of the Pure Elements are born, 
And the face of Self-Mind, the Five Purities, 
is seen. 
In the Beyond-Measure-Palace of the Central 
Channel, 
The proclaimer of Buddha achievement 
Shouts to the Four Rainbow Cakras.2 
To the armies of the Web of Myriad Forms3 
For discipline [I] give the order of nonclinging. 

--- PAGE 390 ---
By realizing that all forms are self-awareness, 
I have beheld my consort's face- the true 
Mind Within. 
So none of the sentient beings in the Three 
Great Worlds 
Eludes the embrace of this great Thatness. 
This is my companion, the wonderful Bodhi-Mind. 
Happy it is to consort with her always, 
For never will she take leave of me! 
Upon hearing this song, Dharma Bodhi was very much pleased. He 
said, "Truly the inner experiences of. a yogi are beyond description. 
Nevertheless, please tell us briefly about [your understanding] of the 
View, Practice, and Action." In response Milarepa sang: 
He who can watch his mind without distraction 
Needs no talk or chat; 
He who can absorb himself in self-awareness, 
Need not sit stiffiy like a corpse; 
If one knows the nature of all forms, 
The Eight Worldly Desires will vanish of 
themselves. 
If no desire or hatred is within his heart, 
He needs no pretense or show. 
The great Wisdom and Trikaya 
That transcend Sa111sara and Nirval)a both, 
Can never be achieved by search and aspiration; 
Never can one attain them 
Without first receiving blessing from the Lineage. 
Dharma Bodhi then said, "Your View, Practice, and Action are truly 
marvelous." Milarepa replied, "Now please tell us your understanding on the profound Key-Instructions gained in your practice." Dharma 
Bodhi then sang: 
For the gifted ones in this assembly 
I pray to the wondrous Succession of the 
PracticeThrough this propitious Karma 
Soon may we all behold [your holy faces]. 
If one cannot subdue habitual thinking and 
wandering thoughts, 

--- PAGE 391 ---
Milarepa's Meeting with Dharma Bodhi 
What will be the use of observing the mind? 
If one cannot conquer ego-clinging and 
pleasure-craving, 
What will be the use of meditating for an age? 
He who does not strive for altruistic deeds, 
Will be o'ertaken by his pride 
And gain no progress. 
If one follows not the Guru's guidance, 
What benefit can he gain 
By being with pleasant friends? 
Pretense and vanity directly cause disgrace, 
Quarrels and discord bring misfortunes. 
If one always tells the truth, 
It often smites another's heart. 
If one practices not altruism 
How can he attain Buddahood? 
The instructions one has learned will 
become profounder 
If restfully he remains alone. 
Oh you great Yogi of Tibet, 
You are proficient in poetry and songI am not good at chanting or at singing, 
But now, exhilarated, excited, and inspired 
I can sing this song for you. 
May we soon, in the Pure Land of Great Happiness 
All sing the holy hymns [together]. 
Dharma Bodhi and Milarepa continued their delightful conversation for some time, then both took their leave. 
When Milarepa and his disciples returned to Nya Non, people in the 
village brought wine to welcome them, and asked about the meeting 
with Dharma Bodhi. In answer, Milarepa sang: 
When rises the sun or moon, 
All Four Continents are bright; 
When moisture and warmth abound, 
Fruits will ripen on the trees; 
When mother and son together meet, 
The pain of longing ceases; 
When an accomplished one appears 
The world is gay and prosperous! 

--- PAGE 392 ---
When Dharma Bodhi came to the wood of Bhalbo 
Dson, 
I, Milarepa of Tibet, went there to see him. 
He rose from his seat 
And made obeisance to me. 
Thus people were caught in surprise and doubt. 
Folding his two hands and bending both his 
knees 
He bowed down before me. 
This symbolized the Truth of Two-in-One. 
He asked about my health and welfareThis symbolized the all-embracing Whole. 
In answer to his kind inquiry 
I showed him the [signless] Mahamudra. 
In the Temple of Non-dual Purity 
We had an illuminating talk of no-words, 
with joy. 
A pure wish in our past lives 
Had brought about this meeting. 
I must have had a Karma-link with him before, 
When Buddha descended to this world. 
This meeting with my brother-friend 
Was delightful and auspicious. 
It will be heard and asked about 
In far-distant lands. 
Hearing this song, the patrons of Nya Non were all very much 
pleased and excited. It is said that because of Dharma Bodhi's obeisance, the Jetsun's fame and fortune became even greater than before. 
This is the story of Milarepa meeting with Dharma Bodhi. 
NOTES 
1 Dinrin: This name also appears as Dinri. 
2 The Four Rainbow Cakras: The literal translation of this phrase should be 
"The Rainbow Place or State of the Four Cakras." It actually denotes the state 
of thorough liberation and ultimate Enlightenment. The mind of one who has 
reached this state becomes the AU-knowing Wisdom, and his body, the radiant and 

--- PAGE 393 ---
Milarepa's Meeting with Dharma Bodhi 
magic-like Rainbow Body (T.T.: hJah.Lus.). The Tantric expression of "attaining 
the Rainbow Body," or "reaching the Rainbow State," thus signifies the achievement 
of Buddhahood. 
3 Web of Myriad Forms (T.T.: sGyu.hPhrul.Dra.Wa.): This may also be 
translated as "The Magic Manifestation Web, or Net." This is an important term, 
reflecting the basic Tantric view on the Realm of Totality, which is strikingly simi· 
Jar to the philosophy of Hwa Yen. To explain it very briefly, all manifestations are 
unsubstantial, delusory, dream-like and magic-like, devoid of any self-nature. Because of this very unsubstantial or void nature, all manifestations can arise simultaneously in the same place without hindering one another- in fact each and every 
manifestation can arise in another's place simultaneously in an interpenetrating 
manner. Thus, using a graphic exP..ression to describe this awesome, interpenetrating 
state, "Manifestation Web," or "Web of Myriad Forms" is used in the Buddhist 
Scriptures. See "The Essence of Buddhism," by D. T. Suzuki, The Buddhist Society, London. See also the translator's forthcoming book, "The Philosophy of Hwa Yen 
Buddhism." 

--- PAGE 394 ---
THE CHALLENGE 
FROM THE LOGICIANS 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
H
AVING fully mastered the Mind-realms of himself and others, Jetsun Milarepa was able to cause Dharma Bodhi of India to make 
obeisance to him. His fame thus spread afar. The people of Nya Non, 
at that time, all made offerings to him for the benefit of both the living and the dead. With ever-increasing fortune he remained happily 
in the Belly Cave of Nya Non to help sentient beings. 
Now there were some scholar-monks [logicians and theologians] in 
the Nya Non Monastery, who were very jealous of Milarepa. They 
vilified him by calling him a heretic, and heaped many abuses upon 
him. 
At one time, a mild famine broke out at Nya Non, and many vl1· 
lagers went to the scholar-monks for loans [in order to buy seeds 
for] sowing. The monks said to them, "Since we do not practice or 
know anything about heretic teachings, we have never received any offerings from you people for performing the rites for the dead. Our 
largess is used for the single purpose of providing provisions for studying and practice of the immaculate Dharma, which of course is of no 
help to you. Now if you want a loan you should go to your heretic 
teacher to whom you gave all your belongings when you had them." 
Thus the peoples' request was rejected. One among the borrowers 
commented, "Well, to some extent what the monks have said is quite 
true. We may regard the Jetsun as our refuge in this life and the 
lives after. But we have needs in this life too. We should, therefore, 
also make offerings to the scholar-monks." Then the villagers made an 
agreement and compromised with the monastery. 
Not long after this incident the scholar-monks held a conference under the leadership of Lodun Gedunbum and Radun Dharma Lhodre. 
--- PAGE 395 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
One conferee said, "Milarepa must be chased out of this place, otherwise we can never attract more people or spread our teachings. Besides, Milarepa's teaching is heretical and evil, he surely deserves to 
be ousted." But the elders replied, "It would not look well if we drove 
him out, people would criticize us. The best way is to send three 
of our most learned scholars who are well-versed in Sanskrit, logic, 
philosophy, and the Siitras to challenge him in debate on Buddhist 
doctrines. Since he is so ignorant, possessing nothing but a tongue, he 
will not be able to answer our challenges and arguments. Out of one 
hundred questions, at best he may answer but one or two; then we 
can scorn and abuse him. Mortified by such a disgrace, he will run 
away of his own accord." Three most learned scholars were then sent 
to the Jetsun. When Rechungpa saw them coming he was not pleased. 
He went in and asked Milarepa, "There are three scholar-monks here 
who want to see you- should I let them in?" The Jetsun replied, 
"My Guru Marpa said to me, 'You should devote your body, mouth, 
and mind to benefit sentient beings in all possible ways; even in your 
daily conversation you should try to serve them.' By all means let them 
in. I will see them." Then they were led in and given water to refresh them. Milarepa said, "The power of one's faith can split rocks, 
crack the earth, and divide the water. Now, please preach for me the 
teaching of the Sutras." The leader of the scholars then rose from his 
seat snapping his fingers, and said proudly, "Yes, we are teachers who 
have mastered the Three Learnings1 and their disciplines and possess 
the three robes of the Dharma -
the symbol and source of all merits. 
I may or may not preach for you the teaching of the Siitras, but now 
let me ask you first: \Vhat merit do you possess th~t you, a layman, 
have been receiving and enjoying people's offerings and gifts without 
the slightest qualm and with so much confidence?" In answer to his 
question, the Jetsun sang "My Realizations from Meditation": 
Embodied in my Guru's nectar-like instruction . 
Is the pinnacle Dharma of the Ultimate Tr-o:thThe essence of all teachings from Scriptures 
and from Reason, 
To which all scholars and priests aspire in 
veneration. 
Pray may He not depart from me 
But ever sit above me 
As my glorious adornment. 
[To you learned scholars] 
I now relate my devotion-practices 

--- PAGE 396 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAllPA 
By dividing them into three groups. 
The first group that I practice, 
Is the Arising Yoga of my Patron Buddha, 
The second is the Nac;lis, Pral)as, and Bindus, 
The third is the Mahamudra. 
In the four periods of each day 
I practise the Yoga of Bodhi-Mind. 
In accumulating the true Bread of Faith 
I contemplate the Voidness; 
In accumulating the Karmic Bread of Faith 
I offer the Dorma;2 
In accumulating the Bread of Self-faith 
I give oblations to the deities. 
To the ghosts I give away the Dorma remnants. 
I am a yogi who turns the Wheel of Nourishment. 
Having realized the Voidness of all things 
I am qualified to receive and enjoy offerings. 
One of the scholars said, "As a person with maimed hands can 
never climb mountains, so one without knowledge of Buddhist studies 
can never attain Liberation. As a blind man sees nothing in the chapel, 
so one without experience of meditation will never see Reality. To 
practise the Arising Yoga one must first know how to practice it. Now 
you said that you have done so, but tell us how?" 
The Jetsun then sang: 
When I practise the Arising Yoga of the Patron 
Buddha 
I see my body, vivid like a rainbow yet void, 
Of which no substance whatsoever can be found. 
So have I freed myself from all desires. 
All talk is like an echo in a deserted valley. 
For it I have neither fancy nor aversion. 
So have I exhausted all likes and dislikes. 
The Illuminating-Void of Mind 
Is like the radiance of the sun and moon, 
Without limitation or attribute. 
Dissolved into it, my ego-clinging becomes 
nought. 

--- PAGE 397 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
The common human body, word, and mind 
Are themselves the Body, Speech, and Wisdom of 
the Self-Buddha. 
Being free from all that's vulgar, 
I always feel great happiness and joy. 
I am happy because my deeds are in accord 
with Dharma, 
I am inspired because I follow 
The right Dharma Path. 
"What you have said may be correct," commented the scholar. "Now 
tell me how you practise the Na<;lis, Prai:tas, and Bindus?" In reply the 
Jetsun sang: 
In practising the Na<;lis, Prai:tas, and Bindus 
I meditate on the Three Channels and 
Four Centers. 
As the attachment to body is exhausted 
The ego into nought dissolves itself. 
The Key-words of the [Five] Elements3 are 
purified, 
So they vanish not, but become illumined. 
I behold the self-face of Reality, 
So there is no chance for me to make mistakes. 
The Prai:tas all are gathered in the Central 
Channel, 
And thus they hit the vital point. 
The White and Red Forces unite within me, 
The experiences of bliss, illumination, and 
non-thought spontaneously arise, 
And so the knots of doubt and ignorance are 
untied. 
I practice the Dharma by heart and not by mouth, 
I conjoin together the Mother-and-Son-Light 
And exterminate the complex of desires. 
As form and Void into one are merged, 
My mind is at ease and full of joy. 
I am every happy 
For I never fall into the trap 
Of mere conceptualization of the Void. 
As all confusions have vanished into Dharmadhatu 
I feel but joyful and gay! 

--- PAGE 398 ---
The scholar then said, "The marmots who live underground can 
sleep [hibernate] for four months during one flow of the PriiQa-current without even slightly shaking their bodies. Remaining under the 
water for any length of time, the fishes can still survive. They can do 
so merely because of their [inherited] PriiQa powers, yet these animals cannot be conceived of as possessing any merit, as their minds 
are completely blind! You should know that all merits consist in one's 
understanding. Now tell me, how do you practice your so-called 'Mahamudra'?" 
The Jetsun sang: 
When I practice Mahamudra, 
I rest myself in the intrinsic state, 
Relaxingly without distraction or effort. 
In the realm of Voidness, 
I rest myself with Illumination. 
In the realm of Blissfulness, 
I rest myself in Awareness. 
In the realm of Non-thought, 
I rest myself with a naked mind. 
In manifestations and activities, 
I rest myself in Samadhi. 
Meditating on the Mind-Essence in such a manner 
Numerous understandings and convictions arise. 
By Self-illumination all is accomplished without 
effort. 
Looking no more for Enlightenment, 
I am extremely happy. 
Free from both hope and fear, 
I feel very joyful. 
Oh, what a pleasure it is to enjoy 
Confusion when as Wisdom it appears! 
"It is true that from your mouth no [meaningful] thing can come 
out but your tongue," remarked the scholar. "What you have just said 
seems not so bad, but it is like an imitation of the original thing. Now 
tell us who is your Guru?" The Jetsun replied, "I attain all my knowledge through studying my mind within, thus all my thoughts become 
the teachings of Dharma. So long as I do not become separated from 
my own mind, I am always accompanied by sutras. I have realized 
that all manifestations are Mind, and the mind itself is the illumination. These are my Gurus." Whereupon he sang: 

--- PAGE 399 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
I shall now tell you who my Gurus are. 
My Gurus are the Jetsuns, 
Whose immaculate Bodies manifest as the Buddha's 
Pure Land. 
The purified Five PraQas are their thrones, 
The purified Five Na<;lis are their lotus seats, 
The purified Five Elements are their Sun-andMoon cushions. 
The void Mind-Essence is my Guru's body; 
My Guru is Dorje-Chang, with the Wisdom-Body; 
My Guru is Tilopa, with the Six Miraculous 
Powers; 
My Guru is Naropa, with the Net of Myriad 
Spells;4 
My Guru is Marpa, to whom I owe the 
greatest debt. 
They sit e'er upon my head as my glory. 
If you have a pair of clear and sincere eyes 
You will see them as real Buddhas. 
If with sincerely and faith you pray to them, 
The rain of grace will ever fall upon you. 
If you offer practice and devotion, 
The treasury of Accomplishments will be opened 
to you. 
Having heard this song, faith in the Jetsun was aroused in the three 
scholars. They all bowed down to him and said, " 'Ignorance, blindness, and confusion - these three evils have created all misfortune in 
the world!' How true this is! How true this is! With our blind minds 
we thought that you were an ignorant man who took people's offerings by [deceiving them] with your crazy Dharmas. But you have answered our challenging questions with ease and without the slightest 
hesitation. We now regret very much the quarrel we have imposed 
upon you. Please forgive us. Since we do not have the opportunity or 
merits to meet your Gurus, we shall look up to you and pray to you 
with sincerity and veneration, for you are even greater than the 'Treasury-of-Accomplishments.' Pray now vouchsafe us the Initiations and 
instructions." So they besought Milarepa in a very humble and respectful manner. The Jetsun was greatly pleased. He then gave them the 
Initiations and Pith-Instructions, and set them to meditating. Later, 
they all gained Experiences and Realizations, and became· the three 
enlightened snow-lion-like yogi-scholars. 

--- PAGE 400 ---
Now, at this time the people of Nya Non held a great festival in 
the village and invited the Jetsun and all his disciples, including these 
three scholar-priests, to attend. A throne was prepared for the scholar-priests Lodun5 and Dhar Lho6 -
and also a row of seats for the 
other scholar-monks. A throne and more seats were made ready for 
the Jetsun and his Repa disciples. 
The three scholar-priests who were sent to dispute with the Jetsun 
came. Dressed like yogis, they appeared as Repas sitting on the lower 
seats, and drank wine from the Kapala [skull-cup], draught by draught. 
When Lodun and Dhar Lho saw this they were convulsed with rage, 
and said to themselves, "You scoundrels, dirty lice, betrayers! As long 
as you stay here, our doctrine will be disparaged and confounded! We 
will talk to these dirty traitors and get rid of them in an appropriate 
manner." Lodun then got up from his seat and said to the Jetsun, 
"You are an extraordinary yogi, so you must have a sound knowledge 
of logic. Otherwise, acting like this, you will degrade the Dharma, ruin 
yourself and others, and disqualify yourself as a Dharma-practicer. 
Therefore, please give us a simple proposition in accordance with the 
rules of logic." The Jetsun replied, "My dear scholar, you should try 
to rest yourself in the inborn Dharma-Essence instead of in words and 
talk. In daily life you should always attempt to subdue your desires. 
Correct understanding and merit can only grow from within, otherwise you will be driven into the Miserable Realms by jealousy and the 
Five Kle~as. So please do not ruin yourself! I do not understand the 
logic of your School. My own 'logic' is that of the Guru, of the PithInstructions, of diligence and perseverance, of remaining in solitude, 
of meditating in the hermitage, of producing the Realizations and 
true understanding within, of the sincere patrons with true faith, and 
of being a genuine and worthwhile receiver of patronage. Being bound 
by the 'logic' of jealousy and evil cravings, one is liable to experience 
the 'logic' of Hell and suffer the 'logic' of pain. I do not know any 
'logic' other than this. In order fully to describe my 'logic,' I shall 
sing you a song, so listen to me": 
I bow down to my Kle~a-free Gurus. 
Alas, at this time of defilement, 
Great is people's jealousy! 
Please listen to me, Lodun and Dhar Lho. 
If from my mother's womb I did not come, 
How could I have drunk her milk? 
If she fed me not on her sweet milk, 
How could I have eaten the three kinds of grain? 

--- PAGE 401 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
If I did not eat the grain, 
How could I have grown up? 
If I did not grow up, 
How could I have crossed the door? 
If I did not cross the door, 
How could I have wandered in all countries? 
If I did not visit all countries, 
How could I have found my gracious Guru? 
If I did not meet my Guru, 
How could I have received the Pith-Instructions? 
Without instructions how could I meditate in 
solitude? 
Without meditating in solitude, 
How could the inner Experience and Realization 
arise? 
Without the Realizations and the inner-heat, 
How could I keep warm 
In a garment of sheer cotton cloth? 
If I cannot live in a cotton robe 
How can the patrons have faith in me? 
If my patrons have no faith in me 
How can you, oh teacher-scholar, be jealous 
of me? 
If jealousy and hatred had ne'er arisen in you, 
How could you, oh teacher-scholar, go to Hell? 
On the high plateau yonder 
The wild beasts run and play, 
Making the hounds keen and jealous; 
Is not this the very reason 
For the hounds becoming angry? 
In the Belly Cave of Nya Non 
I, the worthy Milarepa, stay. 
This makes you, the teacher-of-words, painfully 
envious. 
Is not this the very reason you are so distraught? 
Seeing the alms offered by my patrons, 
You, the learned priest, became jealous. 
Is not this why you were angry and confused? 
Oh great teachers and scholars, 
Cling not to meaningless words and empty talk 
Deeming them to be the Truth! 
--- PAGE 402 ---
Even heretics can play with them. 
One can waste two-and-thirty lives and gain 
nought, 
If his mind but follows words. 
It would be much better, therefore, 
To conquer the devil of egotism. 
I have no time to waste in words, words, and 
still more words! 
Nor do I know logic or how to pose a proposition. 
Therefore, you are the one 
Who wins the argument to-day! 
Dhar Lho then said, "I asked you in the language of Dharma, but you 
did not answer my question in Buddhist terms. Instead, you have sung 
a deceptive song to cheat gullible folk. Who cannot sing this kind of 
trash? Your song may deceive fools, but never me. If you cannot answer my questions today with scholastic language in Buddhist terms 
of academic tradition, but [shamelessly] still intend to receive alms 
from people with your deceiving songs, you well deserve to be trampled down." Saying this he seized a handful of earth and threw it 
in the Jetson's face. The Jetson brushed it off, smiled at him, and 
said, "How can you, the scholar who adheres to words and books 
merely for the sake of the pleasures of this life, act in accordance with 
the Dharma? Driven by your powerful Karmas and sins, all your learning and priestly disciplines will only bring you more unhappiness. As 
I understand them, all Dharmas are remedies for human passions and 
desires; but the way in which you practice them will only increase 
your passions and desires. Therefore, my Dharma and yours are completely different and contradictory. Since we do not speak the same 
language nor believe the same principle, how can we find a common 
base from which to discuss the Dharma?" 
Now seeing all these things, Rechungpa thought to himself, "Although 
I am not worthy even to match a single hair of my Guru's head, if I 
do not beat this sinner who is now trying to hurt the Jetson, I shall 
then violate the Samaya Commandment [Tantric Precept); but if I 
punish him I will create great merits." He then picked up a stick and 
rushing towards the priest, was about to strike him. At once the Jetsun caught his arm, saying, "Rechungpa, my son! The wealth that 
cannot be used when one is in want, the kinsmen who do not assist 
when one is in need, and the Dharma that cannot help when one is 
under [adverse] conditions, will only make one more miserable. You 
should control yourself and try hard to think of the Admonishments. 
I shall now sing a song to awaken your good thoughts and Awareness." 

--- PAGE 403 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
I bow down to Marpa, my gracious Guru and 
my glory, 
The great Jetsun, the shelter of all beings! 
I pray you save us from doing evil deeds! 
Oh Rechungpa, my son, 
Calm yourself and listen to me! 
Those hypocritical Buddhists who "talk big" 
Become commoners at once 
When they meet with adverse conditions. 
Because their intentions are evil 
From wrong-doings they will always suffer. 
If you ever fight with people, 
You violate the precepts through and through! 
Calm yourself my son 
And listen to your Guru! 
In the vast firmament of the peerless Dharma, 
My eagle-child of Awareness learns to fly; 
But never should he pride himself on his flying 
power, 
Lest he fall into the sectarian abyss. 
Rechungpa, listen to your Guru's words! 
In the great ocean of the Dharma Practice 
My fish-child of Awareness learns to swim; 
But never should he pride himself on his power 
of swimming, 
Lest he fall into the net of confusion. 
Rechungpa, listen to your Guru's words! 
On the Snow Mountain of Dharma Actions, 
My lion-child of Awareness learns to fight; 
But he should never pride himself on his 
fighting power, 
Lest he be lost in the snowstorm of desires. 
Rechungpa, listen to your Guru's words! 
In the Precious Land of Dharma-Accomplishment 
My child of Awareness learns to trade; 
But never should he trade with shrewdness, 
Lest he lose the great pearl of Dharma-Essence. 
--- PAGE 404 ---
Rechungpa, listen to your Guru's words 
And try to keep your temper, 
Lest you be scorched by anger! 
Rechungpa, discipline yourself 
And quench your passions! 
Hearing the Jetsun's song, Rechungpa calmed down. The patrons 
in the assembly all blamed the scholar-priests. Rechungpa was also 
slightly criticized [for his outburst]. After this incident, the patrons 
were all confirmed with a deeper faith than ever in Milarepa. It was 
the scholar-priests who first had the intention of slandering the Jetsun, 
but in doing so they had only disgraced and discredited themselves. 
Being frustrated and humiliated, Dhar Lho, Lodun, and some other 
monks again went to the Jetsun [on the following day] to seek revenge. They brought much meat and many books with them. When 
they arrived, they asked permission to see the Jetsun in order to apologize for their conduct of the day before. Rechungpa said, "There is 
no need for apology, nor for further debate, and there is no necessity for you to meet the Jetsun." While Rechungpa was trying to stop 
them, some other disciples [slipped into] the Jetsun's room and besought him to see the priests. He said very kindly, "The best thing 
is not to do any wrong, but if you have, and can repent of it with 
sincerity afterwards, this is also very good. Now, let the scholar-priests 
come in and talk to me." Thus he accepted the interview. The priests 
then offered the meat and said, "Yesterday, you were in the right. We 
regret what we did. In apology, we offer you this meat. Using these 
books as frames of reference for judgment, let us now discuss the 
Buddhist teachings in a friendly manner." The Jetsun replied, "Dear 
teachers, the proverb says, 'Judging from the complexion of his face, 
one knows whether the man has eaten or not.' In the same light, the 
fact that one knows or knows not the Dharma, can easily be detected 
by whether or not he can conquer his own ego-clinging desires. If he 
can, that proves he knows and also practices the Buddhist teachings. 
One may be very eloquent in talking about the Dharma, and win all 
the debates, but if he cannot subdue even a fraction of his own egoclinging and desires, but merely indulges himself in words and talk, 
his victories in debates will never bring him any profit but will only 
increase his egotism and pride. This is the cause of wandering forever 
in Sarpsara and falling to the bottom of Hell. Therefore, as I can see, 
all this argumentation is harmful and destructive. Your apology for 
[your misconduct yesterday1 is very good indeed. Now we have finished our discussion and you may return to your home." 
Dhar Lho then said, "Only Buddha can say whether one has con-

--- PAGE 405 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
quered his ego-clinging and desires. One may not be able to subdue 
his ego-clinging, but that does not mean his knowledge about Buddhism and eloquence in debate condemns him to fall into Hell and 
wander in Sa111sara forever; to say that is to say knowledge and learning are sinful. One may claim that scholarship itself is a great sin, but 
this will not absolve him from his rconceit] of being virtuous, nor 
protect him from doing the wrong thing even with a right intention. 
This perhaps will cause his direct fall to the bottom of Hell. Therefore, it is of great importance to learn well and to distinguish what is 
right and what is wrong. For these reasons we must discuss the Buddhist teachings. Since I am familiar with the rules and manners of 
conducting a debate, I suggest that you choose a topic in which you 
are well-versed, and propound a proposition- in its light. We will then 
evaluate it and give you our opinion. On the other hand, if you think 
that we are not well-learned scholars, you may ask us any question you 
like and we will try to answer it." The Jetsun replied, "If you must 
insist, I have no other choice. Both of us are known to the people 
here. They have heard of us, see us, and know us well. I shall now 
take up a topic beyond both erudition and ignorance. I will ask you 
some questions; also I will propound my proposition [on Buddhist 
teachings]. Now, please answer me, Is space obstructing or non-obstructing?" The scholar replied, "No one would ever ask this kind of 
question. But since I have given my word just now, I must give you 
my answer: Of course space is non-obstructing- what else could it be?" 
"But I think space is obstructing," said the Jetsun. 
"What is your reason for daring to make such a presumptuous assertion?" 
In the meantime, Milarepa had entered the "Samadhi-of-SolidifyingSpace" and replied, "Let us see whether space is obstructing or nonobstructing! Now, will you please stand up and move around, or stretch 
your limbs?" 
The scholar then tried to move but found he could not do so. He 
had to remain in his original posture, unable even to open his mouth, 
and sat stiffly there [like a dead image]. Whereupon the Jetsun Uevitated] and walked, stood, lay down, and sat in the lotus posture, 
right out in space. Then he emerged from Samadhi and said to the 
scholar, "You have maintained that space is non-obstructing, but why 
cannot you move your body?" 
"This is because you have learned evil spe11s and black magic from 
your Gurus. What happened to me was simply due to your evil mantras and sorceries; it is a we11-known fact, recognized by all sentient 
beings, that space is non-obstructing." 
Milarepa then asked, "Is it true that without conceptualization and 

--- PAGE 406 ---
rationalization, space is regarded by all as non-obstructing? Do the animals also consider space to be so? You and your teachers, who deem 
that it is, are now refuted by your own experiment. All of this may be 
due to my 'black magic,' but the fact that the obstructing nature of 
space has been proved to you is quite sufficient. Now, I shall give you 
my proposition: I declare that the rock in front of us is non-obstructing. What is your reaction to this statement?" 
The scholar replied, "Unless you apply your evil mantras and sorceries [again], the rock cannot be otherwise than obstructing." 
To this the Jetsun said, "In accordance with what you suggested 
in the beginning [(that each party may test the other in any subject), 
I now want to test your magic powe~], for I do not think that you 
are well-versed in this subject. Now, please perform some magic to 
make the rock in front of us become non-obstructing." 
"To be able to make magic, and to be willing to do so, are two quite 
different things," replied the scholar. " 'Capable of making' does not 
mean being allowed to make. Only you evildoers play these blackmagic tricks to cheat others." 
"Just now you gave me the impression that you seem to know and 
can do everything," said the Jetsun. "What you called 'forbidden magic,' is now being performed like rainfall by infinite Buddhas throughout the universe." 
Lodun then said, "Just as space became obstructing a while ago, now 
please demonstrate a spell for making the rock non-obstructing." 
Whereupon, the Jetsun entered the Samadhi-of-Space-Exhaustion, 
making the rock permeable, and then passed through it from the top 
to the bottom and from one side to the other; also, he kept half of 
his body in the rock and half outside of it. Then, he threw the rock 
up and let it fall. Finally he lifted up the rock with his hand, and 
cried to Rechungpa, "Bring a pillar!" Rechungpa brought a pillarshaped stone and set it up. [Milarepa then placed the huge rock upon 
it] leaving his hand-prints indented on the rock. These marks can be 
seen to this very day. 
The scholar Lodun then said, "It seems that you have made the rock 
non-obstructing. If this is not delusive magic, we too should be able to 
pass through the rock. Now tell us, can we also do it?" 
The Jetsun replied, "Of course! If the rock were obstructing, should 
I not then have been killed when it fell?" 
The scholar, Dhar Lho, then said, "The rock never touched me. If 
there was no rock in the first place, what is the use of talking about its 
non-obstructiveness?" 
"The fact [that you did not feel the rock come down and crush you] 
is the very proof that it is non-obstructing," replied the Jetsun. "That 

--- PAGE 407 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
you fail to feel a thing does not imply the non-existence of that thing." 
Now Dhar Lho became even more angry than before, but Lodun began to be uncertain, and to waver. He thought, "All this seems to be 
genuine. We skeptical and incredulous scholars are always very difficult to convince. If these performances are not created by ma:gic but 
are proofs of his accomplishment in the Path, I should acquire from him 
the teaching of the Six Paramitas." He then asked, "Will you please 
tell us how to practise the Six Paramitas?" In answer Milarepa sang: 
Oh Three Great, Precious Refuges, 
Sitting on my head as my joy and glory, 
I pray with sincerest heart 
That you may never leave me. 
I pray you to fold me in your compassion, 
I pray that you attend me with kind thoughts, 
I pray you to grant Ultimate Truth to all 
sentient beings. 
The Mahayana Yogi hears not the Dharma of 
mere words; 
In the truth of Voidness, [he knows] there is 
no practice. 
So he renounces of himself the Ten Vices. 
If from parsimony one cannot free oneself, 
What is the use of discussing charity? 
If one does not forswear hypocrisy and pretence, 
What is the use of keeping discipline? 
If one abjures not malicious revilings, 
What is the use of exercising pretentious 
"patience"? 
If one abandons not indifference and inertness, 
What is the use of swearing to be moral? 
If one conquers not the errant thoughts within, 
What is the use of toiling in meditation? 
If one does not see all forms as helpful, 
What is the use of practicing the Wisdom? 
If one knows not the profound teaching 
Of forbidding and allowing, 
What is the use of learning? 
If one knows not the art of taking and rejecting, 
What is the use of speaking on Karma-causation? 
If one's mind does not accord with Dharma, 

--- PAGE 408 ---
What is the use of joining the Order? 
If the poisonous snake of Kl~a is not killed, 
The yearning for wisdom only leads to fallacy. 
If venomous jealousy is not overcome, 
One's yearning for Bodhi-Mind will be an illusion. 
If one refrains not from hurting people, 
His longing for respect and honor 
Is merely wishful thinking. 
If one cannot conquer ego-clinging and prejudice, 
His craving for the Equality-of-Dharma 
Only brings wrong views. 
If one cannot subdue the demon, clinging-ego, 
His Kle~as will be great and his Yoga bound 
to fail. 
If one's actions conform not with the Dharma, 
He will always hinder the good deeds of others. 
If one has not yet absorbed his mind in Dharma, 
His babbling and prattling will only disturb 
others' minds. 
Therefore, do not waste your life in words and 
chatter 
But try to gain the assurance of no-regret 
And the confidence of facing death! 
"Well, I admit that you have heard of the Six Paramitas," commented Dhar Lho. "Now tell me how should one practise the Ten Paramitas?" In answer to his challenge, Milarepa sang: 
Oh gracious Jetsun, Marpa the Translator! 
I pray you to quench the "dharmas of jealousy," 
I pray you to protect us in these evil times. 
Now, listen to me Dhar Lho, you evil-minded scholar! 
Without remembering or thinking of death 
You have indulged in words and arguments. 
For the past two-and-thirty years 
You have failed to realize this fact. 
But you can gain far more 
If you devote yourself to actual practice. 
Alas, in this time of defilement, 
Great are people's passions and desires, 
And unbearably glib are sinful people's tongues. 

--- PAGE 409 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
On the Other Shore7 of Non-ego which I have reached, 
There is no distinct Paramita of Charity. 
On the Straightforward Other Shore on which I live 
There is no distinct ParamiUi of Discipline. 
On the Other Shore of No-Separation-from-Devotion, 
There is no distinct Paramita of Diligence. 
On the Other Shore of the Immediate-Presence 
where I dwell, 
There is no distinct Paramita of Concentration. 
On the Other Shore of Realizing-the-Absolute, 
There is no distinct Paramita of Wisdom. 
On the Other Shore of All-Perfections where I live, 
There is no distinct Paramita of Means. 
On the Other Shore of Conquering-Four-Demons, 
There is no distinct practice called 
"Paramita of Power." 
On the Other Shore of Two-Benefits8 where I dwell, 
There is no distinct practice called "Paramita 
of Vow." 
Since the faulty Klesas are themselves Illumination, 
There is no thing outstanding 
To be known as "Wisdom." 
This is the right way of practicing the Dharma;9 
Empty words are useless and help little! 
"Your practices and understanding are indeed right!" exclaimed Lodun. On the other hand, Dhar Lho remarked, "Your words are like 
third-hand imitations; they cannot stand close examination. As to the 
magic and sorcery, even pagans can perform them perfectly. The Ten 
Paramitas you have just talked about are merely nominal, they are not 
at all in accordance with these books. Now, we should discuss the subjects indicated in them." [He pointed to the books in front of him, 
and continuedl: "All human knowledge should be examined and evaluated through logic.10 Logic is the most important science of allleaming. If one knows logic, all other studies become secondary. Therefore, I shall first discuss logic with you. If you can answer my questions I shall then acknowledge you. Generally speaking, logic is the 
study of judgment and definitions, of which the most important subjects are the studies of direct experience, of inference and deduction, 
of 'sufficient reasoning' and 'false-reasoning,' of 'non-decisive proofs,' 
and of the patterns for constructing propositions. Now, tell me about 
all these things!" 
The Jetsun replied, "Teacher, your body and mind are both pos-

--- PAGE 410 ---
sessed by devils. Since you have neither faith in yourself and in your 
Yidham, nor any veneration toward Buddha Himself, how can I expect you to agree with me? When I drink the soup of your favorite 
Dharma-of-no-Compassion, my tongue and palate are burned. When I 
eat the food of your beloved Dharma-of-no-Renunciation- which 
tastes like [a dish of] vegetable greens cooked with dust and ashes 
but without any salt or seasoning- my stomach is filled with arrogance and egotism! Then from the upper part of my body I belch with 
self-conceit and vomit the waste of jealousy; from the lower part I 
break the wind of slandering and discharge the feces and urine of 
vanity. I am then caught by the deadly sickness of injuring-all. Therefore, I know nothing about your teachings, which, if used as an antidote, would only worsen the sickness, and as a Dharma would only 
lead people to sin. What I understand is that all manifestations [consist in] Mind, and Mind is the Illuminating-Voidness without any 
shadow or impediment. Of this truth I have a decisive understanding; 
therefore not a single trace of inference or deduction can be found in 
my mind. If you want me to give some examples of 'false-reasoning,' 
your own knowledge is a 'good' one, because it is against the Dharma; 
and since this 'false reasoning' only enhances your cravings and 
makes them 'sufficient,' it is a good example of 'sufficient reasoning.' 
Your hypocritical and pretentious priestly manner contains the elements of both 'false' and 'sufficient' reasoning, which in turn stand 
as a good example of 'non-decisive proof.' " 
Hearing the Jetsun's remarks, Lodun covered his head with his shawl 
and laughed; Dhar Lho shook his head, burst out laughing, and cried, 
"Thank you for correcting my 'spelling'! You are the one who can 
hardly imagine the difference between the head and the tail of my 
feces, but yet takes himself as the Holy Buddha. How amusing! How 
ridiculous! You said that both my body and mind are possessed by 
devils, but who is the witness of that? If it is because of scholarship 
and knowledge of logic that I praise myself and denounce others, you 
are just like me: for you even talk as if you were Buddha Himself, and 
humiliate me even to this extent! By the same token, you also have 
your own 'logic.' In brief, you have no merits or fortune to [learn 
the right doctrine]. Besides, instead of answering my question correctly, you have puffed out a lot of nonsense and big words -bigger 
than the penis of an ass! I think you had better hide it, sit quietly, 
and shut your mouth." 
The Jetsun replied, "I wanted to sit quietly, but you would not let 
me! Naturally you have no need for my 'logic,' but my 'logic' has 
brought me happiness and peace. Therefore it is very helpful and important. Since I was talking to you from the viewpoint of the innate 

--- PAGE 411 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
Truth which just hit you on the spot, it appeared as if I were praising myself. The minds of all sentient beings are void yet illuminating. 
They can neither be affected by the defilements of Sa111sara nor by 
the glories of Nirvana. This very mind is called the Buddha of Universal Origin, or the Treasury of Buddhahood.11 It is only because we 
do not understand ourselves that our minds are veiled by temporal 
blindness; we, as a result, begin to wander in Sa111sara and become 
miserable sentient beings-of-desire. He who [fully] realizes his own 
mind, is called the Enlightened One, the Pure One, or the Buddha, 
and he attains Nirval}a. Lord Buddha said: 
'The Matrix of Buddhahood permeats all sentient 
beings. 
All beings are therefore Buddhas in themselves.' 
"Also He said: 
'Sentient beings are Buddhas in themselves, 
Yet are they veiled by temporal defilements;12 
Once the defilements are cleansed, 
Then will they be Buddhas.' 
"[Buddha also said]: 'He who realizes his own mind, knows that 
the mind itself is the Wisdom, and no longer searches for Buddha 
from other sources. This is the highest teaching one can practice.' 
"[As I understand] it, whoever realizes the inborn IlluminatingVoid Mind becomes Buddha. I consider that the Ultimate Truth is 
no other than the realization of one's own mind, but you scholars 
have no faith in this. As to your body and mind being in the hands 
of devils, evidence can be shown, and all people here may witness it. 
However, this would hurt and damage you too much, therefore it is 
better that I do not talk about it." 
The scholar replied, "How wonderful is this! You say that my mind 
and body are in the hands of devils; if you have any convincing proof 
why don't you bring it out now? I think I am much better than those 
fakers who cheat people through deceptive sorcery and gloomy songs." 
The Jetsun smiled at him and said, "Well, if you insist, I have no 
choice but to convince you. Now, pay attention and try to understand 
what I am going to say! A thing that you cherished with great affection is now in someone else's hands. Is not this very action [of giving a cherished thing to another] itself a sufficient proof that your 
body and mind are possessed by devils?" 
Hearing this, Dhar Lho was nonplused. His face first turned green 

--- PAGE 412 ---
and then black. Although the Jetsun now tried to stop Rechungpa 
from [further] exposing Dhar Lho's scandals, Rechungpa would not 
listen and went forward to a girl (among the visitors), who had little 
faith towards the Jetsun but great faith in Rechungpa, and took a 
bracelet off her wrist. Dhar Lho was so ashamed that he became utterly speechless. Then, [recovering himself), he turned on the J etsun 
and Rechungpa, attacked them outrageously in abusive language, and 
walked out. Rechungpa was so delighted that he showed the bracelet 
to everybody. Afterwards Rechungpa went again to the girl's home and 
obtained a rosary [that the scholar had given her], brought it back, 
and showed it to all. People were thus convinced of Dhar Lho's infamy. 
Meanwhile, the scholar Lodun thought, "If the information was 
not given to Milarepa by others, he must be a genuine and great 
[accomplished being). I must think of a way to test him." Then remarking, "We have had enough discussions and debates today," he 
returned home. On that same evening he poured blood into his begging-bowl but filled his skull-cup with milk,13 and inverted the images 
of Gautama Buddha and his attendants. He said to himself, "If he 
knows 'what I have done, then he is really an accomplished being and 
has genuine miraculous powers." 
The next day Lodun went to the Jetsun again. Upon his arrival, 
he first mer Rechungpa, who said to him, "Well, my dear scholar, have 
you come to disgrace yourself and the Dharma again?" Lodun replied, 
"No, this time I have come to pay homage to the Jetsun, for I now 
have great faith in him." Saying this he slipped into Milarepa's room. 
The Jetsun smiled at him and commented, "My dear teacher, you 
don't have to test me like this. I see all the secrets hidden in your 
heart as vividly [as if they were in my own hand). You have poured 
the Essence of the Five Poisons14 into the monks' utensil [the bowl] 
and poured the juice supposed to fill the begging bowl, into the skullcup. Also you purposely inverted the Buddha's and Bodhisattva's images. Now please do not do such reactionary things, things that no 
Dharma-follower would dream of doing. Please pour the right drinks 
into the right vessels, and put the images back in their correct positions." When Lodun heard this remark he was nonplused and frightened half to death. His faith in the Jetsun then rose high. "Pray preach 
me the Dharma that you practice yourself," he implored, "for I am 
now fully convinced!" Milarepa replied, "It is very good that you now 
consider yourself convinced. But my teachings cannot be given to the 
wrong person, one who is not capable of receiving them. Listen to 
my reasons": 

--- PAGE 413 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
I bow down to Marpa, the Translator; 
I pray you to enable me, the mendicant, 
To observe the Secret Precepts. 
The divine teachings of the Secret Doctrine 
Are precious yet formidable! 
Should I give them to you, the bigoted scholar 
Who knows nothing but words and argument, 
It would be a sheer waste! 
If one absorbed in meditation talks nonsense, 
His meditation will be ruined and interrupted. 
The teachings of Tantra should be practised secretly; 
They will be lost if demonstrated in the marketplace. 
Accomplishment is attained by practicing 
the Bodhi-Mind; 
A great Yogi will go astray 
If he follows priestly rules. 
The Pith-Instructions are meant for good Vessels; 
They will but wasted be, 
If given to the incapable. 
If one adheres first to seclusion 
But later abandons it, 
His efforts will all be wasted. 
The songs of yogic experience are profound, 
But if one sings them.to all people, 
It will only lead to waste and pride. 
There are too many ways in which 
To lose oneself and squander life! 
In answer to your question 
I have said enough today. 
The scholar said again, "You may not like to tell me your inner 
Experiences, but apparently you seem to have brought forth the Wisdom through your meditations. Now please tell me briefly about your 
understanding of the Initiations, Path, Stages, View, Practice, and Action." The Jetsun replied, "I know nothing of your teaching concerning these topics, but mine is as follows": 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa. 
I sing in answer to your question. 
Please listen and think carefully, 

--- PAGE 414 ---
And for a time forget your criticism! 
The best scenery is nought-to-seeThat is the Mind-Essence of Illumination. 
The best gain is nought-to-getThat is the priceless treasure of Mind-Essence. 
The best food for satiation is nought-to-eatThat is the food of beyond-form Samadhi. 
The best drink is nought-to-quaffThat is the nectar of the Bodhi-Mind. 
Wisdom is but Self-awareness, 
Beyond all words and talk! 
This is not the Hinayanist's world, 
This is no realm for fools. 
The highest Initiation is that of "This." 
He who realizes the truth of "nor-high nor-low," 
Has reached the highest Stage. 
He who realizes the truth of no-action, 
Is following the Supreme Path. 
He who realizes the truth of no-birth, no-death, 
Obtains the best that he can hope for. 
He who realizes the truth of no-inference, 
Has mastered the best logic. 
He who realizes the truth of no-great, no-small, 
Understands the teaching of the Supreme Vehicle. 
He who realizes the truth of no-virtue and no-evil, 
Has acquired the Supreme Means. 
He who realizes the truth of not-two, 
Has attained the Supreme View. 
He who realizes the truth of no-observations, 
Knows the supreme way to meditate. 
He who realizes the truth of no-accepting and 
no-abandoning, 
Knows the supreme way to practice. 
He who realizes the truth of non-effort, 
Approaches the highest Accomplishment. 
This truth cannot be understood by 
Arrogant and self-conceited teachers -
The prideful scholars of mere words, 
And the "great yogis" who prejudge. 
For they are those who aspire to Liberation 
But only find enslavement. 

--- PAGE 415 ---
The Challenge from the Logicians 
They are caught by the "two-clingings." 
They want emancipation but only find confinement; 
They want release, but are bound instead. 
They sink down, down to the bottom of SaiTlsara; 
They wander, wander in the Three Gloomy Realms. 
After this, the scholar Lodun's pride and arrogance were completely 
broken down. He prostrated himself before the Jetsun and asked him 
for the Dharma, but he was not able to get the Instructions from the 
Jetsun at that time. Confirmed with great faith, he said to Milarepa, 
"The debates we have had are indeed 'true debates,' I admit that you 
have won." 
He then returned home and said to Dhar Lho, "I am convinced that 
what Milarepa has said is true, and that we logicians have little sincerity, faith, or devotion; nor do we have the pure thoughts and spirit 
of renunciation. I am now really skeptical about the usefulness of our 
knowledge. Truly, I do not know whether this knowledge is helpful or 
obstructive to the course of Liberation. I also regret very much that I 
thought his genuine superpowers were morbid sorceries." Dhar Lho 
replied, "The change in your attitude merely shows that you have no 
confidence in the Dharma; what you have said is like childish babbling. 
I think he is possessed by a great devil, and his magic powers and 
telepathy are merely devil-inspired. He does not know one iota of 
Buddhist teaching. Nor did I have an affair with that woman; his 
slanderous accusation was absolutely untrue!" Saying this he died, full 
of hatred and vicious thoughts. Because of his hate and cravings, he became a fearful demon after death. Later, the Jetsun told his disciples, 
"Because of Dhar Lho's ill-omened attack on me, he has now fallen to 
the far edge of SaiTlsara!" Thus, those scholars who slandered the Jetsun all incurred loss for themselves. 
Later the scholar Lodun put himself in the Jetsun's care. After meditating for some time he eventually became the foremost of the five 
scholar-yogis in the ranks of the close-sons of Milarepa. His story will 
be related in the pages to follow. 
This is the story of Milarepa overcoming the ill-intentioned challenge [of the scholars] through his miraculous powers and wonderperformances. 

--- PAGE 416 ---
NOTES 
1 The Three Learnings (T.T.: Slob.gSum.): the learnings of Precept, of Meditation, and of Wisdom. 
2 Dorma: See Story 30, Note 7. 
3 Key-words of the Five Elements: Each of the Five Elements that constitute 
the physical body is symbolized by a specific key-word (bija), i.e., the Fire Element 
bija, "Rtim," the Space Element bija, "A" and so forth. 
4 See Story 33, Note 3. 
5 Lodun: His full name was Lodun Gedunbum (T.T.: Lo.sTon.dGe.hDun. 
hBum.). 
6 Dhar Lho: His full name was Radun Dharma Lhodre (T.T.: Ra.sTon. 
Dar.Ma.bLo.Gros.). 
7 Other Shore: "Paramita" is translated by both Chinese and Tibetan 
scholars as "Reaching-the-Other-Shore," meaning reaching the Nirva~a beyond Sarpsara. Some Western scholars also translate this term as "Perfection." 
8 The Two Benefits: deeds that lead to the benefit of oneself and that of 
others. 
9 In addition to the Six Piiramitas practiced by Bodhisattvas, four more are 
given for the advanced stages. They are: the Piiramitas of Means, of Power, of Vow, 
and of Dharma Clouds, subsequently assigned for the practice of Enlightened Bodhisattvas of the 7th, 8th, 9th, and 1Oth stages. 
10 Logic (T.T.: Tshad.Ma.), meaning measurement, standard, correct thinking, and so forth. "Tshad.Ma." is derived from the Sanskrit word "Pramana," signifying [that which is] prior to opinion or thinking; the means of acquiring right 
knowledge. 
11 The Treasury of Buddhahood (T.T.: bDe.g<;eg.sl'lin.Po.; Skt.: Tathiigatagarbha). This term may also be translated as "the seed or cause of Buddhahood," 
without which the attainment of Buddhahood is not possible no matter what spiritual efforts may be made. 
12 Temporal defilements: All "defilements" (T.T.:. Dri.Ma.), such as passions, 
desires, ignorance, etc., are in their deepest sense, rootless, delusory, and temporal. 
To regard them as something concrete or permanent is erroneous and misleading. 
13 Skull-cup, or Kapala (T.T.: Thod.Pa.): the human skull used as an essential utensil in Tantric practice. It is employed by Tantric yogis as a cup to fill with 
wine as an offering to the deities. In rare cases, in the performance of certain rituals 
of the Fierce Deities (T.T.: Khro.Wo.), blood, semen, urine, feces, and saliva- the 
so-called "impurities" and "filthy things," as men regard them -are offered to the 
deities. The main purpose of this curious rite is to eliminate discriminative thoughts 
and to transcend both the realms of purity and impurity. This is strictly Tantric. 
No Hinayana or other Mahayana School practices it. 
Here the scholar Lodun reversed the customary way of offering in Hinayana, and 
in the Tantra, to test Milarepa. 
14 The Essence of the Five Poisons: The Five Nectars (T.T.: bDud.rTsi.ll'la.) 
of Tantrism are the five major "filthy" discharges, i.e., urine, feces, semen, blood, 
and spittle. Milarepa refers to blood here as the Essence of the Five Poisons. See 
Note 13. 

--- PAGE 417 ---
RECHUNGPA'S THIRD 
JOURNEY TO INDIA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
T
HROUGH his miraculous powers the Jetsun Milarepa had conquered 
the scholar-priests in their ill-intentioned debate and had won the 
argument. However, his heart-son, Rechungpa, was not satisfied with 
this victory, for he thought that the Jetsun had not answered the 
monk's questions in a scholarly manner. "The only way," Rechungpa 
thought to himself, "to conquer these scholars, who cannot even be 
convinced by the evidence of miracles, is through logic and argument, 
or by black magic and curses. I might ask the Jetsun to teach me 
black magic, but it is not likely that he would. Oh, confound it! These 
damned scholars who belittle genuine miracles as sorceries! They certainly deserve to be dealt with! But the Jetsun will never do it. Well, 
it is true that my Guru is well-versed in the Pith-Instructions for attaining Buddhahood in one life, but in order to beat these scholars, 
I shall go to India to learn logic and science." He then went to Milarepa and told him of his intention. The Jetsun said, "Rechungpa, if 
we had been defeated in the debate, how could the scholars have 
credited us with pure [thoughts]? If you go to India merely for the 
purpose of learning the art of debate, you are then doing something 
wrong and worthless. [That also means that you will] forsake meditation practice. In learning 'semantics,' you may acquire some knowledge about words, but still you will not be able to win all the debates, 
nor can you master the whole study of letters. Only Buddha can answer all questions and challenges, but to achieve Buddhahood one must 
practice. Therefore, the best way is to abjure the world, renounce all 
thoughts and wishes of this life, and devote oneself to meditation. One 
may slay people by black magic, but if he cannot deliver the victims 
[from Samsara], both he and the victims will be damned. Formerly 
--- PAGE 418 ---
I used black magic to curse my enemies, but because of. this sinful 
deed I had to go through many painful trials under Marpa. Life is 
very short, no one can tell when death will fall upon him. Therefore 
please forget everything else, and concentrate on your meditation." 
[In spite of his Guru's advice], Rechungpa pressed the Jetsun to 
grant him permission to go to India. Milarepa then said, "If you insist upon ignoring my advice, you may go to India; but I am not 
sending you there to study logic and science. When I was with Marpa, 
I received from him only four of the nine complete teachings of the 
Formless Oakini Dharma Series. He said that the other five were still 
available in India, and also prophesied that a disciple in our Lineage 
would later secure them from [a teacher of] Naropa's Transmission. 
Thereby many sentient beings will be benefited. Since I have been 
devoting myself to meditation, I have not yet attended to this matter. 
These teachings, therefore, are still to be obtained. I am now old and 
sick, also I have fully realized my own mind - there is no need for 
me to go. I think it fitting that you go to India to procure them. You 
will, however, need some gold for your journey." 
Thereupon, the Jetsun and Rechungpa collected all the gold that 
people had offered them, which totaled quite a large sum. Then Shindormo and Lesebum, together with many patrons, prepared a sacred 
banquet as a farewell party for Rechungpa. In the assembly, the Jetsun presented his disciple with all the gold, and said, "Rechungpa, 
my son! Listen to my song and think about it. You should try to secure the teachings in India in this manner: 
I bow down to Marpa, the Translator. 
Pray bless us that we keep to your Tradition. 
This uninformed son of mine, the loser of debate 
And full of doubts, has stopped his meditation 
And is about to wander far away to study. 
This is the very thing a yogi should avoid! 
Rechungpa, when you arrive in India, 
Try to secure the Formless Oakini Dharmas 
Of the great Pal)c;lita Naropa's Succession; 
But, never give yourself to studying words! 
In the beginning I met the right person, 
I put myself in the hands of Marpa. 
In the middle, I practiced the right teaching, 
Meditating on the White Rock Mountain.1 

--- PAGE 419 ---
Rechungpa's Third Journey to India 
At the end, I asked for alms in the right places 
for alms; 
I beg here and there without friends or kinsmen. 
Since I have disposed of Sarpsara and Nirvii.Qa 
And have nor hope nor fear in my mind, 
I shall ne'er regress in my meditation. 
When with my Guru Marpa on that steep hill 
He once said to me: 
"The King of the Mighty Wheel holds 
[It as] the Jewel, 
And the Bird with Five Families 
F1ies in [It's] expanse of Dharma-Essence.1 
Five special teachings in India still survive: 
First, the Lamp of Illuminating Wisdom, 
Second, the Wheel Net of Nii.Qi and Prii.Qa, 
Third, the Great Bliss of Precious Words, 
Fourth, the Universal Mirror of Equality, 
And Fifth, the Self-liberation Mahamudrii.. 
These five teachings are still taught 
in India." 
I am now too old to go, 
But you, child of Marpa's Lineage, 
Should go to India to learn them! 
Rechungpa was delighted. He picked up the best piece of gold, 
tossed it to the Jetsun as [his farewell offering], and sang: 
Bless me, my teacher, 
Let me risk my life 
To fulfill the Gurus' will. 
Pray help me get the :Oakinis' Teachings as prophesied. 
With your great Wisdom-Compassion 
Pray e'er protect, and ne'er part from me. 
Pray, at all times look after this, your son, 
Who has no kinsmen and no friend. 
Pray conquer all his hindrances 
And save him from going astray! 
Pray safeguard him where'er he goes in IndiaA land of danger, and full of bandits! 
Pray lead him to the right teacher, 

--- PAGE 420 ---
As he wanders on alone in that foreign land! 
In response, the Jetsun sang: 
My son Rechungpa, on your way to India 
Remember these seven Trinities of counsel: 
The Skillful-Path of Tantra, 
The Guru's Pith-Instruction, 
And one's own judgment, 
Are three important things for your remembrance! 
Respect and serve the learned, 
Have faith in your Guru, 
Be determined a~d perservering. 
These are three things you should remember. 
Rightly to direct the Life-stream [PraQa], 
To enter the Dharma-Essence, 
And to master all the teachings, 
Are three techniques you should remember. 
The views of the Bliss-Void, 
Of the myriad forms, 
Of reasoning and following the scriptures, 
Are three essentials you should remember. 
A partner qualified in Mudra, 
Experience of the bliss therein, 
And the "Elephantine Work,"3 
These are the three delights you should 
remember. 
To instruct an idler brings misfortune, 
To speak of one's experience leads to loss, 
In towns to wander damages one's Yoga. 
These are three dangers to remember. 
To join the assembly of the Brethren, 
To attend the meeting of I;>akin'is, 
And be present at the [secret] feasts, 
Are the three occasions not to miss. 

--- PAGE 421 ---
Rechungpa's Third Journey to India 
Think of the meanings of this song, 
And put them into practice! 
Rechungpa made many obeisances to the Jetson and then set out 
for India. Accompanying him were fifteen monks, their leader being 
a Ningmaba Lama• called Jidun. In Nepal, both Rechungpa and Jidun had some success [in spreading the Dharma]. They 9lso met 
Dipupa's disciple, Bharima. 
[When they asked the King of Ko Kom in Nepal] for a "TravelPermit," the King said, "It is wonderful that you, the heart-disciple 
of the great Yogi who refused my invitation before, have now come 
to me." He was delighted and granted all Rechungpa's requests. Arriving in India, Rechungpa met Dipupa and obtained all the teachings 
he wanted. Dipupa also had great faith in Milarepa. He entrusted 
Rechungpa with his gift- an aloewood staff- to present to the Jetsun 
upon his return to Tibet. 
. 
On this journey Rechungpa also met the accomplished Yogini, Magi,0 
and he received from her the teaching of the Buddha of Long Life. 
He also learned much black magic and many deadly spells from pagan 
Indians. 
On his way home, Rechungpa again met Bharima in Nepal. As to 
the story of Bharima correcting the jealous translator-scholars, and Rechungpa's other adventures in Nepal and India, the reader may refer 
to Rechungpa's Biography, in which all is told in full. 
In his illuminating [Samadhi] Milarepa foresaw Rechungpa's return. He then went to Balkhu plain to welcome him. Thus, the father 
and the son met again. 
This is the story of Rechungpa and Dipupa. 
NOTES 
1 White Rock Mountain (T.T.: Brag.dKar.rTa.So.): Literally "White Rock 
Horse Tooth [Mountain]." 
· 
2 The meaning of these two statements is very enigmatic. The translator presumes that the first statement, "The King of the Mighty Wheel [Cakravarti) 
holds [It as] the jewel," is an expression of praise for the Teaching of the :OakiJ;Ji. 
"It," in the brackets, in both the first and second statments implies the total teaching of the :Oakini. 

--- PAGE 422 ---
3 The "Elephantine Work" (T.T.: sPyod.Pa.Glail.Chen.): The advanced 
yogi acts fearlessly, with great inspiration, for his own need in various unusual acts, 
that common people may judge him as "crazy" or "immoral." 
4 Ningmaba Lama (a free translation): literally, "a Lama who follows the 
teaching of the Great Perfection (T.T.: rDsogs.Chen.Pa.) ." rDsogs.Chen. is the 
Ningmaba version of Mahamudri. 
5 Magi: an outstanding woman philosopher and yogini of Tibet. She was the 
founder of the gGod:School. 

--- PAGE 423 ---
THE REALIZATION 
OF MEGOM REPA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W HEN the Jetsun Milarepa was living in the Belly Cave of Nya Non, 
a merchant of the Mes tribe1 came to see him and became filled 
with an unshakeable faith toward him. He offered Milarepa and his 
sons all that he had. [He was then given the name of Megom, and 
became a disciple.] Having received the instructions, he set out to meditate and gained outstanding Experiences and Realizations. Thereupon 
Milarepa initiated him with the Two-in-One-Pointing-out-Demonstration of the View, Practice, and Action. Immediately, with infinite joy 
and delight, he beheld the self-face of the Immanent Realty. 
After the ceremony, while Megom was preparing a sacred feast in 
honor of the occasion, he was asked by Drigom Repa, "Do you really 
understand the Dharma and the instructions? How have your inner 
Experiences developed?" 
Megom replied, "By the mercy of my chief Guru2 and the Gurus in 
the Lineage, I am now fully convinced by these teachings. Nothing 
either good or bad can alter my conviction. For the rest of my life 
all I need is my Guru's instructions. I have made up my mind, and 
sworn, to remain in hermitages all my life." 
Hearing this, the Jetsun was very pleased and said, "Quite right, 
Megom. For him who has faith in his Guru and in the instructions, 
the Experiences and Reali7.ations are bound to develop. They may not 
arise quickly, but one must have the determination to mediate alone 
[until they do]. Now listen to my song:" 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa. 
Oh Megom, and all my disciples here, 
--- PAGE 424 ---
Please listen, think, and practice what I sing -
The song of an old man 
Who is an expert in these things. 
Because confusion is uprooted in me, 
I realize that Self-awareness is my Guru. 
He who has not realized this truth, 
Ne,er should leave an accomplished teacher. 
All thoughts and forms are but the Holy Truth. 
If one has not realized this truth, 
He should ne, er neglect the Holy Scriptures. 
Try to renounce all desires and craving! 
If aversion toward worldly things 
Has not arisen in one's mind, 
He should watch and discipline himself! 
Try to realize the sole truth of Non-being. 
If one has not yet experienced this truth, 
He should closely watch his Karma. 
Try to understand that Nirvii:t;.a and Sarpsara 
are not two. 
If one has not reached this understanding, 
He should practice the equality of the Two Truths.8 
Try to realize the oneness of self and others. 
He who has not yet done this, 
E'er should hold to Bodhi-Mind. 
Try to let Realization of itself arise. 
If of itself it has not done so, 
Never forsake the rules and rites. 
Try to transcend the Chief and Ensuing Samadhis.4 
He who has not passed through both realms 
Should follow the Skillful Path in solitude. 
Try to let the Experience perpetually arise. 
He who cannot yet do this 
Should continue with the Three-Points practice.5 

--- PAGE 425 ---
The Realization of Megom Repa 
Try to realize the self-nature of Trikaya. 
Until this has been realized, 
Practice the Arising and Perfecting Yoga. 
Try to make yourself 
Always relaxed and free. 
If you cannot do so, 
Keep your vows and precepts! 
In great joy, Megom cried, "Jetsun, you are most kind to instruct me 
in the two-in-one nature of the View, Practice, and Action by combining them into one teaching!" Whereupon he sang: 
I pay homage to the gracious Jetsun. 
Joyful it is to see the Two-in-One, 
Cheerful it is to meditate thereon, 
Delightful it is on it to act, 
Oh, marvelous are these three "Two-in-Ones"! 
If one knows not the View of Two-in-One, 
How can he understand that all things 
Are but the Dharmakaya? 
If one knows not how to practice the Two-in-One, 
How can he realize that all pains are glories? 
If one knows not the Action of Two-in-One, 
How can he spontaneously relinquish worldly wants? 
All sentient beings in the Six Realms 
Are but the \Visdom of Nirvana. 
This is the View of Two-in-One. 
·All positives and negatives 
And the Wisdom of the Whole 
Are but the Dharmakaya. 
This is the Practice of Two-in-One! 
Like the moon reflected everywhere in water, 
Like a rainbow that by no one can be held, 
Like lamplight shining brightly [in the dark], 
Such is the Action of Two-in-One. 
The core of the View 
Lies in non-duality, 

--- PAGE 426 ---
The Essence of the Practice 
Lies in non-distraction, 
The "pivot" of the Action is 
To embrace and absorb. 
That is Enlightenment! 
This is the understanding 
Your son gained in his devotion! 
All the disciples profited greatly from this song. Then on the eve 
of his departure to meditate in solitude, Megom asked the Jetsun to 
give him a teaching, effective yet easy to practice. The Jetsun replied, 
"Great merits have grown in me since I practiced these instructions. 
You should also follow them. Now listen to my song": 
I, the Yogi Milarepa, see the Essence 
By gazing nakedly upon It! 
I see Beyond-playwords, clear as the sky! 
By letting go, I see Reality; 
By resting at my ease, I realize 
The voidness of all and everything. 
I relax, relax, and come to the Self-Realm; 
I let go, let go, and in the flow of Awareness 
The pure and impure become one! 
Because I search for nothing, 
Thoughts and ideas are all cut off; 
The perils of Sarpsara are thus forever crushed! 
Since I realize that Buddha and my mind are one, 
I no longer wish for accomplishment! 
As the sun disperses darkness, 
When Realization dawns upon one 
I<le5as and Nhamdogs vanish by themselves! 
Hearing this song, Megom was filled with joy. As instructed by his 
Guru, he then went to a hermitage and meditated there alone. Later 
he gained many merits on the Path, attained superb Experiences and 
Realizations, and became one of the close sons of the Jetsun, known 
as Megom Repa, who [in his lifetime] helped many well-endowed 
men. 

--- PAGE 427 ---
The Realization of Megom Repa. 
NOTES 
1 The text reads, "Rus.Mes.Yin.Pahi.Tshon.Pa.Shig.". "Rus.Mes." literally 
means "ancestral lineage," but here the translator presumes "Mes" is the name of a 
tribe, and not to be understood as "ancestral" in the original meaning of the word. 
2 Chief Guru: A Buddhist yogi may have many Gurus. However, the most 
important Guru is he who brings the yogi to the initial Enlightenment; this Guru is 
considered as one's Chief Guru. Not only is he more important than the others insofar as he has actually opened one's mind to the Prajfia Truth, but also he is the main 
reliance of the yogi in his progress on the Path. The first priority should be given to 
him in service, worship, and prayer, as shown by the relationship between Milarepa 
and Marpa. 
3 Two Truths (T.T.: bDen.Pa.gl'Jis.): These are the Mundane and the Transcendental Truths. The former deals with the basic principles of the phenomenal 
world, and the latter with the Ultimate. See also Story 29, Note 11. 
4 Chief and Ensuing Samadhis (T.T.: ml'Jam.bShag. (and] rJes.Thob.): The 
Chief, or Main Samadhi is the real Samadhi stage; the Ensuing Samadhi is the 
after-Samadhi stage, i.e., the daily activities in which the Samadhi experience still 
prevails to some degree. 
5 The Three-Points practice: The translator presumes that this refers to the 
practice of observing the nature of the three successive stages of any passing event, 
i.e., the beginning, the middle, and the final phases. By observing them, one's inner 
Experience can be widened. 

--- PAGE 428 ---
SAHLE AUI AND 
HER UNDERSTANDING 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
T HE Jetsun Milarepa went for alms to Ngogang from the Belly Cave 
of Nya Non. He stayed at La Shin for half a day, and then proceeded to Nagchar. On his way there he met a pretty young girl 
about sixteen years of age, with dark eyebrows and gleaming hair, 
well-dressed and well adorned. She was on her way home from fetching water. The Jetsun said, "Dear lady, will you offer me a meal this 
evening?" The girl replied, "If we who live by the road gave food to 
every alms-beggar we would be preparing meals for them all the time." 
Saying this she entered the house and left Milarepa outside. 
That night the girl had an auspicious dream. The next morning, recalling her dream, she thought, "Generally, sentient beings are veiled 
by blindness. They cannot recognize the Buddha nor the Jetsun Milarepa, who is the Buddha too. Without his grace and blessing, I would 
not have had that dream last night. Can that yogi be Milarepa himself? I will go and find out." 
She then prepared some food and took it to the Jetsun. "My dear 
Yogi, who are you?", she asked. 
"I am an alms-beggar who lives in your neighborhood." 
"Are you not the Jetsun Milarepa from the Belly Cave of Nya Non?" 
"Yes, you may say so." 
Hearing this, a faith that was strong enough to dissolve her entire 
body at once arose within her, and her hair stood on -end. She bowed 
down before Milarepa and cried, "Yes, yes- now I understand! 
This is why I had such a wonderful dream last night!" The Jetsun 
then asked her, "What was the dream?'' 
"I dreamed that a sun and a moon were in my house, but they 
did not shine. Then another sun and moon appeared in the East, 
--- PAGE 429 ---
Sahle Aui and Her Understanding 
bright and radiant. They lit up the dark sun and moon in my house, 
and made them shining bright. Then they (the dark ones) rose up 
and united with the sun and the moon in the East. The whole universe was thus illuminated. Will you please accept me as your servant, 
so that I can develop myself in the Dharma?" 
The Jetsun replied, "I believe you can." Then he blessed her with 
his Samadhi power and returned to the Belly Cave. 
Soon after, the girl visited the Jetsun, bringing a friend with her. 
She gave Milarepa a nugget of gold, and sang: 
Please listen to me, 
Great Repa Yogi, the accomplished One. 
When I look at human lives 
They remind me of dew on grass. 
Thinking thus, my heart is full of grief. 
When I see my friends and relatives, 
They are as merchants passing in the street. 
Thinking thus, my heart is grieved and sad. 
When I see goods hard to earn 
They remind me of the honey 
Of hard-working bees. 
Thinking thus, my heart is filled with grief. 
When I see my native land, 
It suggests a den of vice. 
Thinking thus, my heart is sad. 
By day, I contemplate this truth, 
At night, I think about it without sleep. 
Because of my good deeds in former lives, 
I was born this time a human being. 
My past life drives me from behind, 
Cooking and household duties pull me on. 
I draw closer to death every minute. 
This decaying body 
At any time may fall. 
My breath, like morning-fog, 
At any time may disappear. 
Thinking thus, I cannot sleep. 
Thinking thus, my heart is sad. 

--- PAGE 430 ---
Oh, my Father Jetsun, 
For the sake of Dharma I visit you. 
Pray bless, protect, and pity me, 
And grant me the holy Teachings! 
To test whether the girl could really devote herself to the Dharma, 
or whether she might still be interested in worldly things, the Jetsun 
said, "I do not want your gold. It is very seldom that the rich can 
practice the Dharma, though they may have great ability in other things. 
Since you are still very young, I think it is better for you not to renounce the world completely. Now, hearken to my song": 
I bow down to the gracious Marpa, 
The incarnation of the wheel-turning King! 
In the luxuriant garden of the Joyous Heaven1 
The flowers are sweet-smelling and exquisite, 
But common bees can never find them, 
Though a hundred flowers they may touch! 
On the Tsanglin Continent,2 south of Mount Sumeru, 
There is a bathing pool with Water-of-Eight-Merits 
Which common birds can never find, 
Though they may locate all other places. 
To the north of Bodhgaya 
Grow Tsandan, trees of healing, 
Which cure all congestions. 
But not all sick men can find them, 
Though they gather other herbs. 
On the border between Nepal and Tibet 
Is found the Refuge of the grieved, 
He is the immanent Buddha, the good Wadi.8 
Men without merit cannot see Him. 
They may see other images of Buddha, 
Yet no faith will grow in them. 
In the endless ocean of Samsara 
Wander lonely crowds, 
Oft falling to the Lesser Realms. 
If once born as human beings, 
Few can make provision 

--- PAGE 431 ---
Sahle Aui and Her Understanding 
For their "souls." 
Vain and deluded, they will lose 
Once more what they have gained! 
To be born a human being 
Is rarer than a star that shines by day. 
If blessed enough to win a human body, 
Many will waste it by running after pleasures, 
But few can tread the Path of Dharma. 
Though hundreds the gate may enter, 
Few can keep the disciplines. 
By the grace of my Father Guru 
I have realized that all forms are golden; 
I have no need for your precious gold. 
This is my reply, my faithful patroness, 
A song with five parables and six meanings. 
The enthusiasm that you now have 
Is transient and can be changed; 
A will that is not shaken is ever hard to come by; 
And so, dear lady, I suggest that you go home. 
Trust in the Dharma, is the advice I give. 
Take care of your dear husband 
As though you served a god. 
Maintain your house and fields 
And give your children love. 
Worship Gurus and Buddhas above; 
Protect and help the poor below; 
In between look after your in-laws 
And keep on good terms with your neighbors. 
Now you have been blessed by this old man 
Who wishes you prosperity, long life, and success. 
May you always have the boon of finding holy 
Dharma. 
She bowed down before the Jetson and said, "I am not interested 
in worldly pleasures, but utterly disgusted with everything in Saq1sara. 
Please allow me to give my reasons." Whereupon she sang: 
I bow down to the gracious Jetsun. 
Pray fulfill my wishes with your blessing, 
Pray judge my words and my sincerity. 

--- PAGE 432 ---
Pray, great Repa, listen to this girl's request. 
With ignorant and bewildered mind 
I have thought and searched. 
In the depths of my heart 
I have reflected on the transiency of life. 
I have seen death strike down both young and olo 
Since first I saw the light of day. 
Life is precarious and fleeting 
Like dew upon the grass. 
Time flies unnoticed, and then life is o'er. 
I have never seen or heard of an immortal man. 
I am certain beyond doubt 
That I shall die one day. 
I have no freedom or choice 
Of where to go when I am dead. 
I am sad and fearful 
When I think of the pains that I 
In Lower Realms might bear. 
This world is but a play -
The endless toil of housework, 
The struggle for a living, 
Leaving one's gracious parents, 
Giving up one's life to one's betrothedIf into the Lower Realms one falls, 
Progress and Liberation will be lost. 
Sometimes to myself I thought, · 
How does it make sense -
Freely to give yourself with your parents' goods 
To someone who for life enslaves you as a servant? 
At first a lover is an angel, 
Next a demon, frightening and outrageous, 
In the end a fierce elephant, 
Who threatens to destroy Y.OU. 
Thinking thus, I feel sad and weary. 
Now, this maid shall devote herself to the Dharma, 
Now, she will join her Vajra-brothersl4 
Most men are but credit-collectors; 

--- PAGE 433 ---
Sahle Aui and Her Understanding 
Seldom does a gifted one appear. 
First they steal your youthful beauty, 
Next they snatch your food away, 
Then they pull jewels from your hands. 
Thinking thus, I feel sick at heart. 
Now, I shall devote myself to practicing the Dharma. 
Hereafter I shall foster the children of Wisdom. 
Houses and temples are like prisons; 
At first, they break your heart, 
Then they give you an aching back, 
In the end, they leave you in despair. 
Thinking thus, I feel sick at heart. 
This maid will now devote herself 
To building a chapel for the immortal Dhyana. 
'Tis meaningless to worship symbols and the Siitras 
Except for those who have real faith and sincerity. 
I see people fighting over land, 
Then they quarrel over water, 
In the end, blows are exchanged. 
Thinking thus, I feel sick at heart. 
Now I shall farm the land of self-discipline, 
Now I shall devote myself to practicing the Dharma. 
If one adheres to the Bodhi-Mind 
His merits will surely grow. 
Yet should he crave for wealth 
He will commit much sin in his endeavors. 
In the beginning, burning desire consumes one, 
Then is he possessed by pride and jealousy, 
In the end he fights his foes in desperation. 
Thinking thus, my heart is filled with grief. 
Now I shall devote myself to the Dharma, 
Now I shall cultivate goodwill to all men. 
Clearly we see others' faults 
But seldom see our own. 
How, then, can harmony exist among us? 
Even the immaculate Buddha, 
All-knowing and all-perfect, 
--- PAGE 434 ---
Was found with faults by sinners. 
How, then, can peace exist among us? 
Thinking thus, I feel sad and weary. 
Now I shall devote myself to the Dharma, 
Now I shall look at the self-face of my mind. 
All things appear like gold to you, 
The NirmaQakaya of the Buddha! 
One may not have experienced this, 
Yet [in reality] there is neither existence 
nor non-existence. 
To conquer my greed and clinging 
I now offer you my most cherished thing. 
As the Lord Buddha said, 
"One should renounce belongings 
That increase one's craving. 
All possessions, like magic, are delusive -
One should give them away 
For good purposes and charity." 
Following this injunction of the Enlightened Ones 
I now offer you this gold. 
Accept, please, this small token of my faith 
And grant me your instructions. 
Whereupon the Jetsun Milarepa accepted the gold from the girl 
and then returned it to her, saying, "If you have determined to practice the Dharma, disregarding life and death, you have already entered 
the gate of Dharma. Now you should prepare offerings for the Gurus 
and the Patron Buddha." 
A sacramental offering was then made on a grand scale. The Jetsun ordained her as a Geninma5 in accordance with the general Buddhist Rules,8 initiated her into the esoteric Tantric Order, and gave her 
many verbal instructions. He then named her "Sable Aui," and ordered her to meditate. In a very short time she gained good Experiences and merits, and learned to meditate alone. The Jetsun then 
said to her, "I am very pleased with your faith and perseverance; the 
Experiences and Realizations that you have now gained will enable 
you to meditate independently in solitude. You should go now into 
the mountains and meditate by yourself. Until we meet again, remember these words from my heart." Whereupon he sang: 
Great is the blessing of qualified Gurus! 

--- PAGE 435 ---
Sahle Aui and Her Understanding 
Safe is the shelter of the Three Jewels! 
Mighty is the merciful power of the Guards 
and Oakinisl 
To you all I pay sincerest homage! 
My voice and melody may not be good, 
But this song will surely carry 
The blessing of the Lineage, 
And illustrate the gist of Buddha's teaching. 
Listen, faithful Sahle Aui, the woman devotee! 
If you want to cleanse the rust from the mirror 
of your mind, 
Look into the depth of the pure sky! 
And meditate in quiet mountains 
Blessed by accomplished beings! 
To stay alone in a hermitage 
One should know how to observe 
The deep Essence of the wavering mind. 
Listen carefully, Sable Aui, 
As I tell you how to meditate. 
To have faith unshaken 
While a Novitiate of Dharma is wonderful; 
Like a mountain standing firm, 
Meditate with steadfastness. 
To win the merits of the Buddha, 
Disregard both pain and pleasure! 
Like a river flowing on and on, 
Meditate without interruption. 
To receive the blessing from your Guru, 
You should have incessant faith. 
J.,ike the firmament, devoid of edge or center, 
Meditate on vastness and Infinity. 
To understand the innate Truth, 
Unite Skill and Wisdom. 
Like sun and moon in all their glory, 
Meditate clearly without darkness. 
Knowing that all beings are your parents, 
--- PAGE 436 ---
Love and show compassion to them. 
Use the ocean as a parable. 
Meditate without drowsiness or distraction. 
To see directly the Self-mind, 
You should follow straight the Guru's words. 
Like this great earth, 
Meditate with unshaken firmness. 
To make yourself a vessel of the Dharma 
Meditate beyond all words. 
To realize that all things are holy Dharmas, 
Watch your mind. 
At all times and in all you do 
Provide for yourself with care. 
Deck yourself with the ornament of discipline, 
Wear the clothes of patience, made of sheepskin, 
Ride on the wonder horse of diligence, 
And enter the holy City of Dhyana. 
With the Jem of Wisdom you will be enriched. 
Forget not to repay the bounty of your Guru, 
But give him the best offering -
All you have experienced and realized. 
Do you, my faithful daughter, understand what 
I have said? 
With an even greater faith in the Jetsun than before, Sable Aui 
gave a great feast in his honor. Then, obediently, she renounced all 
worldly affairs and went to meditate on the mountain of Nonyul in 
the Nya Non area, while Milarepa left for the Red Rock of Drin. 
Some time later the Jetsun saw in his so compassionate mind a 
beam of glittering light shoot from a crystal stilpa, [a sign that Rechungpa was having trouble in his devotions]. The fact was that Rechungpa was having difficulty with his breath-control as a result of the 
i>lack-magic practices that he had learned from the heretics. Seeing this, 
the Jetsun thought, "What hindrance is my son Rechungpa having 
now?" He then flew from the summit of the Red Rock Mountain 
toward Lashi. Half way there he landed at Rechin Meditation Cave 
leaving his footprints on the rock. Again absorbing himself in the illuminating Samadhi, he observed the fortunes of Rechungpa and saw 
that neither Rechungpa's body nor life would be affected, but that 
some unorthodox thought was hindering his mind. 

--- PAGE 437 ---
Sahle Aui and Her Understanding 
Milarepa then set out for Nya Non to learn the whereabouts of his 
female disciple, Sable Aui. On the way he met some monks who told 
him that Sable Aui was still meditating in the cave to which she had 
first gone. They said that she never spoke or moved her body, but sat 
still like a dead corpse all the time. They believed that she must have 
gone astray in her meditation. Milarepa thought, "To absorb oneself 
in Samadhi like that is a good thing and not a hindrance." He then 
went toward the girl's abode. Meanwhile, in an illumination, Sable 
Aui also saw the Jetsun coming, so she went to the edge of the valley 
to welcome him. 
After making obeisances and inquiring after his health, Sable Aui 
sat down to one side quietly, without uttering a word. In order to 
examine her meditation experience, Milarepa sang: 
Oh, Sable Aui, the hermit 
Who took the Dharma to her heart, 
With faith and veneration 
You first relied on your Guru; 
And through his blessings 
Your mind has ripened. · 
Sipping the heavenly nectar of the Skillful Path 
A real knowledge of Dharma has grown in you. 
Without sloth and laziness in your devotion 
The Warm-Experience that all saints have had 
Has now grown within you. 
Since no hindrance has arisen, 
You may as well keep silent now. 
As hunger is not killed by poisonous food, 
Nor Liberation reached by a wrong path, 
Efforts so made will be wasted. 
Deer stay in the mountains, 
What is the use of that? 
The black-bird Dorge can sing, 
What is the sense of that? 
The white-bellied Gyuar Mo7 can hold Life-Prai;~a 
well, 
What is the benefit of that? 
The Dombu Tukar8 is skilled in mixing elixirs, 
All pagan yogis practice the Samadhi of No-thought, 
The Brahmans are ascetic all their lives, 
What is the good of that? 
Parrots can talk with eloquence, 

--- PAGE 438 ---
But he who follows not 
The Path of Liberation, 
For all his passionate striving 
Hardly can emancipate himself. 
The human mind is like a whirling vortex. 
Through the power of Samadhi 
One may suppress desires and wandering thoughts, 
But this alone will never ferry one 
Across the ocean of Sa111saral 
To practice the Tsandali Yoga of Forms,9 
One needs Wisdom beyond form. 
To practice the Tsandali at the Heart-Center, 
One must recognize the Bardo Illumination. 
To practice the Ultimate Tsandali of Immanence, 
One must realize the State beyond birth and death. 
To practice the Tsandali Yoga of Bindu and Nac;li 
One must cease clinging to all forms. 
The Central Channel, Dhuti, 10 is beyond 
all efforts and acts; 
It is non-acting, self-existent, originally pure. 
[Seeing it], the knots of the two clingings 
Will spontaneously unravel. 
This is the foremost truth of Mahamudra. 
Dear Sable Aui, have you realized it yet? 
Presenting her inner Experience to the Jetsun, Sable Aui sang: 
The holder of the Lineage of Dorje-Chang, 
The one who was prophesied by all l)akin'is, 
By the grace of Tilopa and Naropa 
Mastered the Four Tantras, the knowledge profound. 
He was Marpa, of the Whispered Succession! 
By his grace in the Ten Directions, 
You have raised many crops; 
By his grace, you have borne immaculate fruits 
One after the other! 
With your blessings, I have gained the great 
Freedom. 
To you, the glory upon my head, 
I ever pay my homage. 
You are the compassionate one, 

--- PAGE 439 ---
Sahle Aui and Her Understanding 
The great Repa from Gung Tang 
Whose fame has spread afar to all lands. 
To you, the crowning gem upon my head, 
I pray with great sincerity and faith. 
Oh, my Father Guru, it is through your grace, 
That we, confused wrong-doers, were converted 
to the Dharma. 
It is you who led us to the right path. 
You ripened the unripened, 
You emancipated those who were not free. 
You made me realize that all 
Manifestations in the outer world 
Are unreal and magic-like. 
I have thus seen the Mother of the Illuminating 
Dharmata,11 
I have thus realized that flowing thoughts 
Are phantom-like projections; 
As waves rise from the sea 
They will vanish into it again. 
All doubts, errors, and 
Temptations in the world 
Are thus wiped out! 
Following the clear Path 
I have gained true knowledge, 
Understanding what the Tantras mean. 
Truth of the lesser path should not 
Be taken for the higher. 
By craving it one cannot reach Buddhahood. 
I now sincerely ask you, my Guru, 
To instruct me in the Tantra. 
Comparing my experience with my Dharma-brother 
Ngan Tson's, 
I cannot help but feel a deep respect for him. 
Like food, my conceit and wrong ideas 
are swallowed; 
Thus my long, leaden slumber has been shortened. 
I have now renounced all men, 
And given myself to meditation. 
For many years I have avoided soft cushions, 
And contemplated on Mahamudra without distraction. 
I am a woman aspiring to Nirval}a, 
Who, from Voidness and Compassion would n'er depart. 
--- PAGE 440 ---
Free from conceit and arrogance, 
I shall e'er be glad to learn the Doctrine. 
Ever in you I trust as in the Buddha. 
With all Oakinis caroling with me, 
This is my song to you, my gracious Guru. 
The Jetsun, very much pleased, said, "You have gained good understanding and Experiences from your meditation. It is indeed difficult 
to win Realization like this. Although you have now entered the Path 
of the Omniscient Ones, you should still remain and meditate in solitude." 
Obeying this injunction Sable Aui again meditated in the hermitage. Later on she became one of the four foremost yogini disciples 
of the Jetsun. During her lifetime she performed a great service to the 
Dharma and benefited many sentient beings. The story of her life may 
be found in a book written by Ngan Tson Dunba Shun Chub Jhalbo. 
This is the story of Sable Aui. 
NOTES 
1 Joyous Heaven (T.T.: dGah.IDan.). 
2 Tsanglin Continent (T.T.: 'hDsam.Giin): the Southern Continent. (See 
Story 2, Note 16.) 
3 Wadi (T.T.: Raf1.Byai'I.Wa.Ti.; lit.: the self-born Wadi): a famous Buddha 
image legendarily believed to have descended from Heaven. 
4 Vajra Brothers, or Brothers-of-Vajra (T.T.: rDo.rJe.sPun.): Those who are 
initiated by the same Guru are Vajra brothers. 
5 Geninma (T.T.: dGe.bsf.len.Ma.): the laywoman Buddhist who has taken 
a vow to observe the five basic virtuous rules. 
6 General Buddhist Rules (T.T.: mDo.Lugs.; lit.: Siitra Traditions): This implies the Rules and traditions that one finds in the general Mahayana Schools whose 
doctrines are based on Siitras but not on Tantras. 
7 White-bellied Gyuar-Mo (T.T.: Gyur.Mo.ITo.dKar.): According to the 
text, Gyuar-Mo seems to be a hibernating animal, presumably a porcupine. 
8 Dombu Tukar (T.T.: Dom.Bu.Thugs.dKar.). 
9 Tsandali Yoga (Skt.: Ca~Q1ili Yoga) is called in Tibetan the "gTum.Mo." 
(Heat) Yoga. See W. Y. Evans-Wentz' "Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines," 
2nd ed., 1958, pp. 171-210. See also the translator's volume, "Teachings of Tibetan 
Yoga." 
10 Dhuti: This is the abbreviation of Avadhiiti, the Central Channel. 
11 Mother of the Illuminating Dharmata: The illuminating Dharma-Essence 
is here referred to as "Mother," a symbol of "origin" or foundation, upon which 
all dharmas depend. 

--- PAGE 441 ---
Obeisance to all Gurus 
'THE STORY OF 
THE YAK--HORN 
H
AVING helped Sable Aui, the outstanding Yogin!, to further her devotion, Jetsun Milarepa went toward Balkhu to welcome his heartson Rechungpa (upon his return from India. On the way there] he 
stayed at Betze Duyundzon (the Land of Pleasure] for some time. As 
Rechungpa was approaching from Gung Tang, the Jetsun saw in a vision that he was suffering from pride. [With this knowledge in mind] 
he went to welcome Rechungpa. 
When the father and son met in the center of the Balkhu plain, 
Rechungpa thought, "I have now gone twice to study in India. Heretofore, I have been following my Guru's instructions to serve the 
Dharma and sentient beings. My Jetsun Guru's compassion and grace 
are indeed great, but I am much more learned in Buddhist philosophy 
and logic than he. Now he has come to welcome me, I wonder if he 
will return the obeisance to me when I bow down to him." With this 
thought in mind Rechungpa prostrated himself before Milarepa and 
presented him with the Ahkaru staff that Dipupa had given him to 
offer to the Jetsun. But Milarepa gave not the slightest sign that he 
would even consider returning the courtesy. Rechungpa was very displeased. However, he said, "Dear Guru, where did you stay while I 
was in India? How is your health? How are my Repa brothers? Where 
shall we go now?" 
The Jetsun thought, "How is it that Rechungpa has become so 
proud? He must either have been possessed by demons or affected by 
the evil influence of pagans. No matter what the cause, I must rescue him from this hindrance of pride!'' So he smiled and answered 
Rechungpa's questions in this song: 
--- PAGE 442 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS.OF MILAREPA 
I am a yogi who lives on a snow-mountain peak. 
With a healthy body I glorify the Mar.u;lala of 
the Whole. 
Cleansed of vanity from the Five Poisons, 
I am not unhappy; 
I feel nought but joy! 
Renouncing all turmoil 
And fondness for diversion, 
I reside alone in perfect ease. 
Forswearing the bustle of this world, 
Joyfully I stay in no-man's land. 
Since I have left embittered family life, 
I no longer have to earn and.save; 
Since I want no books, 
I do not in tend to be a learned man; 
I practice virtuous deeds, 
I feel no shame of heart. 
Since I have no pride or vanity, 
I renounce with joy the saliva-splashing debate! 
Hyprocisy I have not, nor pretension. 
Happy and natural I live 
Without forethought or adjustment. 
Since I want nor fame nor glory, 
Rumors and accusations disappear. 
Where'er I go, I feel happy, 
Whate'er I wear, I feel joyful, 
Whatever food I eat, I am satisfied. 
I am always happy. 
Through Marpa's grace, 
I, your old father Milarepa, 
Have realized Saqtsara and NirvaQa. 
The Yoga of Joy ever fills my hermitage. 
Your Repa brothers are well; 
On hills remote they make progress in their 
meditations. 
Oh, my son Rechung Dorje Draugpa, 
Have you returned from India? 
Did you feel tired and weary on the journey? 
Has your mind been sharpened and refreshed? 
Has your voice been good for singing? 
Did you practice and follow your Guru's 
instructions? 

--- PAGE 443 ---
The Story of the Yak-horn 
Did you secure the teachings that you wanted? 
Did you obtain all the various instructions? 
Have you gained much knowledge and much learning? 
Have you noticed your pride and egotism? 
Are you altruistic in your thoughts and actions? 
This is my song of welcoming for you, 
On your return. 
In reply, Rechungpa sang: 
Obeying my Guru, I went to India. 
My journey was hazardous and full of fear, 
I underwent great pain and toilBut the trip was well worthwhile. 
I saw Dipupa, the great Tantric Master, 
And met Magi, the great Yogini. 
Also I saw the wondrous Patron Buddha 
And witnessed fulfillment of the Oakinis' 
prophecy. 
I have unmistakably attained 
The longed-for Pith-InstructionsThose of the Illuminating Wisdom Lamp, 
The Wheel Net of Prai)a and the Nac;lis, 
The Universal Mirror of Equality, 
The Lantern of the Great Bliss Injunctions, 
The True Words on the Mirror of Self-Mind, 
The Supreme Form of the Sun-like Realization, 
And the Self-liberation Mahamudra. 
I drank Nectar- the Essence of Immortality, 
I received teaching on the Bardo, 
The Pith-Instructions on Dhyana practice, 
On the Five Gems and Symbols Three. 
I was told how to practice the Six Y ogas, 
And how to win what I wanted in the world. 
The Mothers and Oakinis gathered for me 
All these wonderful instructions. 
The Deities and Gurus were all well pleased, 
And my mind united well with theirs. 
Like a rain of flowers, 
Accomplishments fell upon me. 
Heavenly food was fed into my mouth, 
The Pith-Instructions were put into my hand. 
--- PAGE 444 ---
In farewell, the Deities wished me good luck. 
My desires were met and success was won. 
Like the rising sun 
My heart is bright with joy. 
Now I am back, my Jetsun Guru! 
Now I give you the :Oakinis' teachings! 
Please observe them, 
Praise and serve them -
The holy Dharmas that have brought me my achievement. 
Then Rechungpa gave the books [that he had acquired in India] 
to the Jetsun. In order to clear up Rechungpa's pride and arrogance, 
Milarepa sang: 
Do not be proud and pompous, 
My little child, Rechungpa, 
Whom I have nurtured from your teens. 
In a tuneful voice I sing for you 
A golden-rosary of song with meanings deep. 
Keep it in your mind, if you agree with it. 
Goddesses cherish the Formless :Oakini Dharmas, 
[But] he who strives to become too big 
Is liable to be slain by villains. 
The hoarded goods of wealthy men 
Provide enjoyment for their enemies; 
To indulge in luxury and pleasure 
Is the cause of poverty and death. 
He who does not know his limit 
And acts above his station, 
Is stupid as a fool. 
If an officer ill-treats his servants, 
He harms his country. 
If a servant respects not his master, 
He will lose his mind 
And bring misfortune on himself. 
If a Doctrine-holder cannot behave, 
He will destroy the Dharma. 
He who does not keep the Oakinis' teaching secret, 
Disturbs and offends them. 
Oh, my son, your pride in what you learned 

--- PAGE 445 ---
The Story of the Yak-hom 
Will lead you well astray! 
To preach a lot, with empty words, 
Ruins your good Experience and meditation. 
To be swollen with pride and arrogance 
Proves you have betrayed the Guru's precepts. 
Nothing gives cause for more regret 
Than disobedience of the Guru. 
No one is more distracted and confused 
Than he who ceases to meditate in solitude! 
Nothing is more fruitless 
Than a Buddhist who renounces not his kin! 
Nothing is more shameful 
Than a learned Buddhist who neglects his meditation. 
Nothing is more disgraceful 
Than for a monk to violate the rules. 
My son Rechungpa, if you agree with what I say 
You should hold it in your heart; 
If you disagree, do whate'er you please. 
I am an old man fearing death, 
And with no time for chat and gossip. 
You are young and self-conceited, 
Whoever remonstrates with you, you will condemn 
him in return. 
Oh, my gracious Guru, Marpa the Translator, 
Pray help me, the poor beggar 
Who forever abjures all wordly desires! 
Picking up the books and the Ahkaru staff, Milarepa ran ahead with 
great speed by means of his miraculous power. Rechungpa could not 
catch up with him. He ran, gasping and panting, after his Guru as he 
sang this song: 
Oh, please listen to me, my Father Jetsun! 
How could a son ever disrespect his father? 
I only pray you to accept the teachings I have 
attained. 
I was given, beyond any doubt or possible error, 
The instructions on the Formless :Oakini Dharmas. 
From the profound, and the profoundest, doctrines 
I have gained conviction! 

--- PAGE 446 ---
I pray you to understand this, my dear Guru! 
In addition, I also attained the Yoga of Longevity, 
The Oakinis' Symbolic Secret Words, 
The principles of the Vajra Body, 
And the instructions of the Mother Buddha.1 
I now offer them all to you, my Jetson Guru! 
Also I have attained 
The profound Tiger Protection, the Cures of Diseases, 
And the Teaching of Dispersing Demons. 
All these golden instructions I now offer to you. 
Upon my shoulder I have brought back 
The Medicine of Six Merits, 
And the elixirs of gods and goddesses; 
Now I offer them to you, my gracious Guru. 
This marvellous staff made of the supreme Ahkaru 
plant 
Was used by :Oakinis to rest upon. 
It is a priceless and wondrous thing, 
Symbolizing the Tantric teachings of Dipupa; 
I now offer it to you, my Jetson Guru. 
Please appreciate these wonderful teachings 
And have pity on me, the weary Rechungpa! 
Please commiserate me, and give me 
A chance to stop running and panting! 
If you would please, please do so, 
It would be the best charity. 
If one can satisfy the hunger and thirst of others, 
It is of the greatest merit. 
To console people in distress is the best giving; 
To serve people with kindness and show them the 
right path 
Is the obligation of all Dharma-followers, 
As taught by Buddha, our Lord. 
The Jetson heard Rechungpa singing this song while he was running after him. When the song was finished, the Jetson stopped. He 
then sat down on the ground and replied to Rechungpa, singing: 
It is fine that father and son are in harmonyMaintaining harmony with people is a great merit; 

--- PAGE 447 ---
The Story of the Yak-hom 
But the best merit is to keep harmony with one's 
father. 
If one is discordant with all the people he knows 
He must be a person ominious and obnoxious. 
Yet even more ominious is discord between father 
and son. 
Good it is to maintain harmony with one's father 
by right deeds, 
Good it is to repay one's mother's kindness and 
bounties, 
Good it is to act in· concord with all. 
One's wish can be fulfilled 
If he is on good terms with his brothers; 
To please one's Guru 
Is to gain his blessings; 
To be humble is to succeed. 
A good Buddhist is one who conquers all bad 
dispositions. 
Kindness is toleration of slanders; 
To be modest is to gain fame and popularity; 
To maintain pure discipline 
Is to do away with pretense and concealment; 
To live with a sage is to gain improvement; 
To be indifferent is to stop all gossip; 
To be good and compassionate is to advance one's 
Bodhi-Mind. 
These are the things a wise man should do, 
But a fool can never distinguish friend from foe. 
Where the [actual practice of the] Path is 
concerned, 
The Formless I)akini Dharmas do not mean too 
much. 
My relationship with you 
Is much deeper and more important 
Than the Tantric staff of D.ipupa. 
Of the accomplished Mother Magi 
There is no better disciple than I. 
If Oakinis keep their secret teachings from me, 
To whom will they impart them? 
--- PAGE 448 ---
In the golden Max:t<;lala 
I have enjoyed many sacramental festivals. 
With the Patron Buddha, Dorje Paumo, 
I have had much longer acquaintance than you. 
There is not a land of :Oakinis and Bha W os2 
That is unfamiliar to me. 
Much more than yourself, 
I am concerned about the things you are doing. 
Oh, Rechungpa, do not be proud and go astray! 
Let us go into the mountains and meditate in 
solitude! 
Thereupon, the Jetsun and Rechungpa set out together on their 
journey. This is the first chapter of Rechungpa's meeting with the Jetsun at Yaug Ru. 
As the Jetsun and Rechungpa proceeded along the road, Rechungpa again thought, "Had this been another ~uru, I would have had a 
good reception and been most hospitably treated upon my return from 
India. But my Guru lives under such poor conditions himself, naturally it would be impossible for me to expect any comforts or pleasures from him! I have been in India and have learned so many of the 
Tantric teachings! A man like me shoufd not practice his devotion as 
an ascetic, but should practice it with pleasure and enjoyment." With 
these arrogant and evil ideas in his mind, strong thoughts, full of infidelity toward the Jetsun, arose within him. 
At once, Milarepa read Rechungpa's mind. He then pointed to a 
yak's hom lying along the side of the road, saying, "Pick up this yakhom and bring it with you." Rechungpa thought, "Sometimes my Guru 
wants nothing as he always claimed, but at others 'his hatred is much 
stronger than that of an old dog, and his greediness is greater than 
that of an old miser,' as the proverb says. After all, what is the use of 
this tom-out yak-horn?" He then said to the Jetsun, "What good can 
this piece of waste do us -leave it alone!" The Jetsun replied, "To 
take a small thing like this will not increase one's greediness, and sometimes these discarded things are very useful." Saying this he picked 
up the yak-hom and carried it himself. 
When they reached the central part of Balmo Baltang Plain where 
no hiding-place could be found for even a small mouse, the heretofore clear sky suddenly became darkened by gathering clouds. Then a 
great storm, accompanied by violent hail, arose. In the midst of this 
onslaught Rechungpa covered his head in such haste and confusion 
that he completely forgot even to look at his Guru. After awhile, when 

--- PAGE 449 ---
The Story of the Yak-horn 
the hail began to abate, Rechungpa started to search for Milarepa, but 
could not find him. For a time he sat upon the ground and waited. 
Then he seemed to hear the Jetsun's voice coming from the yak-horn 
which had been left beside the road. He walked toward the place and 
saw it was undoubtdly the same yak-horn which the Jetsun had taken 
a few moments before. Rechungpa then tried to pick it up, but it 
was so heavy that he could not move it, even an inch. Then he bent 
down and looked into it, and saw Milarepa seated comfortably within 
with ample room to spare; his body was no smaller, and the hom no 
larger than before, just as the reflection of a large image may be seen 
in a small mirror. He heard the Jetsun sing: 
The grace of my Guru enters into my body. 
If one's body remains like a commoner's 
He is not a great yogi. 
Rechungpa you should pay homage to my miraculous 
body. 
The grace of my Guru enters into my mouth. 
If one makes nonsensical remarks 
He is not a great yogi. 
All Pith-Instructions are found in my song. 
Rechungpa, you should bear them in your heart. 
The grace of my Guru enters into my mind. 
If any unfaithful thought ever arises in one's mind 
He is not a great yogi. 
Rechungpa, you should pay homage to my power of 
telepathy. 
Oh, son Rechungpa, your mind is like a nimble bird; 
Now it flies high, and now it swoops low. 
You should observe this unstable change, 
Stop thinking so much, 
And devote yourself to the Repa's practice! 
If you think you can match your Guru, 
Now you may come into this hom. 
Come in right nowHere is a spacious and comfortable house! 
Rechungpa, your Enlightenment is like the sun and 
moon; 

--- PAGE 450 ---
Sometimes they shine bright, but sometimes they are 
darkened by clouds. 
You should observe this unstable change, 
Stop thinking so much, 
And devote yourself to the Repa's practice! 
If you think you can match your Guru, 
You may come into this hom. 
Come in right nowHere is a spacious and comfortable house! 
Son Rechungpal Your behavior is like the mountain 
wind; 
Now it blows fast and violent, 
And now it blows gentle and slow. 
You should observe this unstable change, 
Stop thinking so much, 
And devote yourself to the Repa's practice! 
If you think you can match your Guru, 
You may come into this horn. 
Come in right nowHere is a spacious and comfortable house! 
Son Rechungpa, your accomplishments 
Are like the crops in the field. 
Sometimes they grow badly, and sometimes well. 
You should observe this unstable change, 
Stop thinking so much, 
And devote yourself to the Repa's practice! 
If you think you can match your Guru, 
You may come into this horn. 
Come in right nowHere is a spacious and comfotable house! 
If one's mind can master the domain of space 
He can enter this horn and enjoy it. 
Come in right now, my son, your father is calling! 
It wouldn't be nice 
If a son refuses to enter his father's house. 
I am a sick and worn-out old man 

--- PAGE 451 ---
The Story of the Yak-horn 
Who has never been in India in all his life; 
His insignificant body is frightened 
By the dangerous road outside, 
Therefore inside this hom he stays! 
Son Rechungpa, you are young, and have been in 
India. 
Also, you have studied under many learned and accomplished Gurus. 
You should now step into this hom 
With your splendid and prominent body. 
Of little value is this rotten yak-hom; 
Surely it will not inflate one's egotism and desire. 
Come in, Rechungpa, come and join your father inside! 
Rechungpa thought, "There seems to be plenty of room there; can 
I also get in?" Thinking this, he tried to enter the horn, but he could 
not even get his hand and head in, [let alone his whole body]. Then 
he thought, "The Jetsun's miraculous power may, or may not be genuine, but he can surely produce hail." Putting his mouth close to the 
hom, Rechungpa sang in a quavering voice: 
Oh, my father Jetsun Guru, please listen to mel 
Whether the View, Practice, Action, and Accomplishment 
Of your servant and son, Rechung Dor Draug, 
Be high or low, bright or dim, great or small, 
Better or worse, it makes no difference; 
He shall continue to pray to you. 
Whether his cotton robe be dry or wet, 
He shall continue to pray to you. 
He may or may not match his father, 
But he shall continue to pray to him! 
Milarepa came out of the hom. He gestured toward the sky, and 
at once the storm began to abate, the clouds to disperse, and the 
sun to break through. Immediately the air became very warm, and 
before long, Rechungpa's clothes were dried. 
After resting a while, the Jetsun said, "Rechungpa, I knew from the 
beginning that your trip to India was unnecessary. Being quite satisfied with the teaching of Mahamudra and the Six Yogas, I did not 
go to India. I am very glad that you have now returned with the 
teaching you wanted." 

--- PAGE 452 ---
"Dear Lama, I am very hungry and cold," said Rechungpa, "let us 
go to the tents over there and beg some food." 
"But this is not the time to beg alms," replied Milarepa. 
"I do not know whether it is the time to beg alms or not, but 
I know that I am starving to death right now. By ail means let us go." 
"Very well, we shall go. I think perhaps it would be better to go to 
the first tent." 
"But in begging alms one must not look only for rich people, and 
neglect the poor," said Rechungpa. "Therefore let us go to that small 
brownish tent near the lower end [of the terrace]." 
So they went toward the small tent. When they reached its entrance to ask the host for alms, a fearful old woman came out and 
said, "A yogi should stick to poverty all the time. Good yogis always 
refuse our offerings, even when brought to them. But greedy people 
like you, never content with what they already have, always come after 
others' belongings. All the things that I had to spare for charity, I already gave to some beggars this morning. Nothing is left now. You 
had better go somewhere else to beg." Upon hearing these malicious 
remarks, the Jetsun said, "The sun is about to set; it makes no difference whether we get food or not this evening, so let us find a place 
to sleep." 
That night the Jetsun and Rechungpa slept nearby. About midnight, they heard a noise in the tent. Then it subsided and all became quiet again. The next morning when the sun arose, the Jetsun 
said to Rechungpa, "Go over to the tent and take a look inside." 
Rechungpa did so, but he found nothing left in the tent except the 
corpse of the old woman who had refused to give them alms the 
evening before. Rechungpa then informed Milarepa of what he had 
seen. The Jetsun said; "The food and other things must be hidden 
somewhere underground," and they went over to the tent together. 
The fact was, that regardless of her malicious talk, the hour had 
come for the old woman -the land was full of epidemics at the time. 
[They found that] her jewelry had all been stolen by the nomads. 
Left behind on the ground was nothing but a small bag of butter, 
some cheese and barley flour, and a pail of yogurt. The Jetsun said to 
Rechungpa, "Son, all things are like this. Last evening this old woman 
was full of stinginess and worry, but now she is dead. Oh, in sooth 
one should give alms to those in need." Thereupon, Milarepa and 
Rechungpa prepared a sacramental offering for the dead woman with 
the things that were left. Rechungpa then packed up the remnants 
of the edible food and was about to carry it away with him, when 
the Jetsun said, "It is not good for one to eat the food of a corpse 
without benefiting it. The proverb says, 'The old men should eat the 

--- PAGE 453 ---
The Story of the Yak-hom 
food and the young men should produce it.' Now, carry the corpse 
upon your shoulder and I'll go ahead to lead the way!" 
With misgivings that he might be contaminated by the filth of the 
corpse, Rechungpa unhappily carried it upon his shoulder while the 
Jetson went ahead to guide them on the road. When they reached a 
marsh, the Jetson said, "Now put the corpse down." He then placed 
the point of his staff at the heart of the corpse, and said, "Rechungpa, 
like this woman, every sentient being is destined to die, but seldom 
do people think of this fact. So they lose many opportunities to practice the Dharma. Both you and I should remember this incident and 
learn a lesson from it.'' Whereupon, he sang the "Song of Transiency 
and Delusion," having six parables: 
Oh, the grace of the Gurus is beyond our comprehension! 
When the transiency of life strikes deeply into 
one's heart 
His thoughts and deeds will naturally accord 
with Dharma. 
If repeatedly and continuously one thinks about 
death, 
He can easily conquer the demon of laziness. 
No one knows when death will descend upon him -
Just as this woman last night! 
Rechungpa, do not be harsh, and listen to your Guru! 
Behold, all manifestations in the outer world 
Are ephemeral like the dream last night! 
One feels utterly lost in sadness 
When he thinks of this passing dream. 
Rechungpa, have you completely wakened 
From this great puzzlement? 
Oh, the more I think of this, 
The more I aspire to Buddha and the Dharma. 
The pleasure-yearning human body is an ungrateful 
creditor. 
Whatever good you do to it, 
It always plants the seeds of pain. 
This human body is a bag of filth and dirt; 
Never be proud of it, Rechungpa, 
But listen to my song! 

--- PAGE 454 ---
When I look back at my body, 
I see it as a mirage-city; 
Though I may sustain it for a while, 
It is doomed to extinction. 
When I think of this, 
My heart is filled with grief! 
Rechungpa, would you not cut off Sarp.sara? 
Oh, the more I think of this, 
The more I think of Buddha and the Dharma! 
A vicious person can never attain happiness. 
Errant thoughts are the cause 9f all regrets, 
Bad dispositions are the cause of all miseries. 
Never be voracious, oh Rechungpa, 
But listen to my song! 
When I look back at my clinging mind, 
It appears like a short-lived sparrow in the woods -
Homeless, and with nowhere to sleep; 
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief. 
Rechungpa will you let yourself 
Indulge in ill-will? 
Oh, the more I think of this 
The more I aspire to Buddha and the Dharma! 
Human life is as precarious 
As a single slim hair of a horse's tail 
Hanging on the verge of breaking; 
It may be snuffed out at any time 
Like this old woman was last night! 
Do not cling to this life, Rechungpa, 
But listen to my song! 
When I observe inwardly my breathings 
I see they are transient, like the fog; 
They may vanish any moment into nought. 
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief. 
Rechungpa, do you not want to conquer 
That insecurity now? 
Oh, the more I think of this 
The more I aspire to Buddha and the Dharma. 
To be close to wicked kinsmen only causes hatred. 

--- PAGE 455 ---
The Story of the Yak-horn 
The case of this old woman is a very good lesson. 
Rechungpa, stop your wishful-thinking 
And listen to my song! 
When I look at friends and consorts 
They appear as passers-by in the bazaar; 
Meeting with them is only temporary, 
But separation is forever! 
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief. 
Rechungpa, do you not want to cast aside 
All worldly associations? 
Oh, the more I think of this, 
The more I think of Buddha and the Dharma. 
A rich man seldom enjoys 
The wealth that he has earned; 
This is the mockery of Karma and Sa~psara. 
Money and jewels gained through stinginess ·and toil 
Are like. this old woman's bag of food. 
Do not be covetous, Rechungpa, 
But listen to my song! 
When I look at the fortunes of the rich, 
They appear to me like honey to the bees -
Hard work, serving only for others' enjoyment, 
Is the fruit of their labor. 
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief. 
Rechungpa, do you not want to open 
The treasury within your mind? 
Oh, the more I think of this 
The more I aspire to Buddha and His teachings. 
The corpse of the old woman was buried [in the swamp], and her 
soul was delivered to the Dharmadhatu. Thereupon the Jetsun and. 
Rechungpa took the edible food with them and set out for Betze 
Duyundzon. 
This is the second chapter, the story of the yak-hom. 
Later, while the father Jetsun and the son Rechungpa were residing at Betze, Rechungpa gained great improvement in his meditation. 
In an Experience of great joy, numerous thoughts appeared in his 
mind. Being aware of this, the Jetsun said, "Rechungpa, what have 

--- PAGE 456 ---
you experienced in your meditation lately?" In relating his Experiences, Rechungpa sang: 
Living with my Guru, I had 
An Experience powerful like a sharp knife; 
With it I have cut inner and outer deceptions. 
Because of this I am happy and gay! 
In the midst of many manifestations, 
I felt as if I were a radiant lamp; 
All instructions thus became clearer than ever 
before. 
Because of this, I am happy and gay! 
When I sat on the peak of a snow mountain, 
I felt like a white lioness, 
Predominating and surpassing all others in the world. 
Because of this, I feel happy and gay! 
When I dwelt on the hillside of Red Rock, 
I felt as if I were a majestic eagle; 
Forever have I conquered 
The fearful expanse of the sea. 
Because of this, I am happy and gay! 
When I roamed from country to country 
I felt as if I were a tiger cub, or a beeNon-attached to all and utterly free. 
Because of this, I am happy and gay! 
When I mingled with people in the street, 
I felt as if I were an immaculate lotus 
Standing above all filth and mud. 
Because of this, I am happy and gay! 
When I sat among crowds in the town, 
I felt as if I were like rolling mercury -
It touches all but adheres to nought. 
Because of this, I feel happy and gay! 
When I sat among faithful disciples, 
I felt as if I were the Jetsun Mila; 

--- PAGE 457 ---
The Story of the Yak-horn 
With cheer and ease I gave instructions through 
songs! 
It is the blessing of my Guru 
That brings me this joy. 
It is through resting one's mind at ease 
That Buddhahood is realized. 
The Jetsun commented, "If not brought out by pride, these Experiences are fine; and you have truly received your Guru's blessings. Toward such Experiences, however, one needs certain understandings, in 
which you still seem to be lacking. Now listen to my song": 
From the depths of my heart, when the great 
Compassion arose, 
I felt that all beings in the Three Realms 
Were enslaved in a prison of fire. 
When the Instructions of the Lineage 
Were imbibed in my heart, 
As the dissolving of salt into water, 
I experienced thorough absorption. 
When the Wisdom shone bright from within, 
I felt as if awakened from a great dreamI was awakened from both the main and ensuing 
Samadhis; 
I was awakened from both "yes" and "no" ideas. 
When one secures the great bliss through Viewing, 
He feels all Dharmas spontaneously freed 
As mists of rain vanish into air. 
When one comes to the Essence of Being, 
The shining Wisdom of Reality 
Illumines all like the cloudless sky. 
When both pure and impure thoughts are cleared, 
As in a silver mirror, 
The immanent bright Wisdom shines forth. 
When the Alaya consciousness dissolves into the 
Dharmakaya, 
I feel my body and soul break forth 

--- PAGE 458 ---
Like the crushing of an egg when stamped upon. 
When the rope-of-clinging is cut loose, 
I feel the existence of Bardo disappear 
Like the uncoiling of a snake. 
When I act without taking or leaving, 
My mind is always at ease and non-doing. 
I feel as if I were a lion, 
With the power of the Three Perfections. 
The Illuminating Voidness, the Illuminating Wisdom, 
And the Illuminating Manifestations 
Are my three inseparable friends; 
Like the sun shining from a cloudless sky, 
I am always in the Great Illumination. 
Like dividing the horses from the yaks, 
The [outer] world and the senses are clearly 
distinct [from the inner]. 
The string of mind and Skandhas is forever cut! 
Having fully utilized this human form, 
I have now completed all Yoga matters. 
Rechungpa, do you also have these Experiences? 
Oh, my son, do not be proud and presumptuous! 
Hearing this song, Rechungpa's mind was straightened out. Then 
Milarepa said, "Now let us, father and son, go to Di Se or Lashi, 
those remote mountains, to meditate." Rechungpa replied, "I am very 
tired- my physical strength has reached the point of exhaustion. I 
think it best that I go to a near-by monastery to recover [my strength], 
otherwise I will not be able to meditate or travel at all." 
"If a determination is made from the bottom of one's heart, one 
can practice his devotion under any circumstances, at any time," co.untered the Jetsun. Thereupon, he sang a song called "The Six Sufficiencies": 
Oh Son, one's own body suffices as a good temple, 
For the vital points within are Heavenly Paradise. 
One's own mind suffices as the Guru, 
For all true understanding comes from it. 
The outer phenomena suffice as one's Sutras, 
For they are all symbols of the Liberation Path. 
The Food-of-Samiidhi is sufficient to sustain one, 

--- PAGE 459 ---
The Story of the Yak-horn 
For the Father Buddhas will come and bless him. 
The Dumo-heat suffices for one's clothingThe warm and blissful dress of the Oakinis. 
To cut off all ties is the best companion; 
To live alone is to become a friend of deities; 
To regard all enemies as passers-by on the road 
Is to avoid hatred. 
The best remedy for all obstacles 
Is to meditate on Voidness, 
For they are all magic-like plays of the mind. 
This is the right way for you to followAgainst it, you will go astray! 
I am an old man close to death, 
Who has no time for chatting. 
You are young, vigorous, and healthy 
And would not listen my helpful advice. 
To talk with honesty and straightforwardness 
To prideful and greedy persons would be a sheer waste. 
If you want to meditate, you may come along with me; 
If you do not, you may do whatever you please. 
The Jetsun was about to set out on his way, when Rechungpa 
grasped his clothing in time [to stop him), and sang this song called 
"The Eight Needs": 
Though the best temple is one's own body, 
We need a place for cover and sleep; 
Without mercy, the rain and wind attack all. 
Because of this, we always need a temple. 
Though the best Guru is one's own mind, 
We need a teacher to illustrate our Mind-EssenceWe cannot neglect for a moment to pray to him. 
Because of this, we always need a Guru! 
Though outer phenomena may substitute for the 
Siitras, 
Hindrances and doubts in any case will arise. 
To clear them up, 
A lucid reference to the Siitras is necessary. 
Because of this, we always need the Siitras! 

--- PAGE 460 ---
TI1ough the food of Samadhi may be sufficient, 
Provisions for nourishment are necessary; 
On food this delusory body must live. 
Because of this, we always need food! 
Though the best clothing is the Dumo-heat, 
Something to cover the body is necessary, 
For who is not afraid of shame and disgrace? 
Because of this, we always need clothing. 
Though the best thing is to cut off relationships 
with all, 
To get support and aid is ever necessary; 
Good or bad, who has not some friends? 
Because of this, we always need friends. 
Though to avoid one's enemies is sufficient, 
Sometimes one meets them on the road -
For who can be immune from hostility? 
Because of this, we always need protection. 
Though the best remedy is to view all hindrances 
as void, 
The demons and ghosts are malignant and powerful; 
To conquer the demon of ego 
Is even more difficult. 
B~ause of this, we always need safeguards. 
To stay with my Guru, brings happiness; 
To return to you brings joy. 
Wherever you go, I will go. 
But I beseech you, by all means, 
To stay in the valley for a short time. 
Milarepa replied, "If you have confidence, to follow my way wm 
be quite sufficient; ·otherwise, there will always be a need for something. Well, if by all means you are unwilling to go to no-man's mountain now, let us go to Bouto to preach the Dharma." Thereupon, the 
Jetson and Rechungpa went to Bouto of Red Rock. 
This is the last chapter of the yak-hom story. 

--- PAGE 461 ---
The Story of the Yak-horn 
NOTES 
1 Mother Buddha (T.T.: Grub.Pahi.rGyal.Mo.), a free translation. 
2 Bha Wo (T.T.: dPah.Wo.; Skt.: Vira): the Brave One. This term refers to 
the male deities of Tantra. All male Tantric deities, except the chief Buddha in the 
Mai}Qala, can be considered as Bha Wos- the Brave Ones who can destroy evils 
and hindrances. Bha Wo is the counterpart of Dakini, or a "male Dakini." Dakini, 
the female deity, is also called Bha Mo- the Brave Woman. 

--- PAGE 462 ---
Obeisance to all Gurus 
RECHUNGPA'S 
REPENTANCE 
W HEN the Jetson Milarepa and his son. Rechungpa were approaching Orin on their way to Bouto, Rechungpa said, "I would like 
to stay in Orin tonight and meet the patrons." But Milarepa replied, 
"My son, let us first go to Bouto without the knowledge of our patrons, 
disciples, or the monks." In a displeased mood Rechungpa obeyed, 
and continued with Milarepa to Jipu Nimadson at Bouto of Red 
Rock. Upon their arrival, the Jetson said, "Rechungpa, fetch some water and I will make a fire." 
On his way back to the hermitage with the water, Rechungpa 
reached [a slope, from where he could see 
below him) the great, 
delightful plateau between Bouto and Jipu. He saw in the center, a 
mountain she-goat giving birth to a kid. Then the mother and daughter each gave birth to another kid; they, in tum, bore more kids, until eventually there were two hundred of them. These wild mountain 
goats frisked about so happily, with such innocence and spontaneity, 
that Rechungpa was amazed. He thought, "These mountain goats are 
even livelier and in many ways better than those of Baltang." With 
great interest, he watched them play for some time. 
Meanwhile Milarepa, who had lit the fire, opened the books that 
Rechungpa had brought back from India, and said with great compassion: "I sincerely pray to all :Oaldnis. I pray you to save and keep 
the Formless :Oakini's Dharma for which I sent from India- the teachings that will benefit the Doctrine and all sentient beings! I sincerely pray to all Guards of Dharma to destroy all heretical books of 
vicious Mantras that will certainly bring great harm to the Doctrine 
and to sentient beings!" After .this prayer, Milarepa meditated for a 
--- PAGE 463 ---
Rechungpa' s Repentance 
short time; and then he burned most of the books until only a few 
incomplete folios were left. 
Now while Rechungpa was watching the mountain goats at play, 
he saw a mastedul goat take the part of a wolf and drive the flock 
across the ridge to the other side of the mountain. At this point 
Rechungpa thought, "Goodness! I have been dallying too long. I must 
go back at once, or the Jetsun will reprimand me." 
He immediately started to return. When he reached a bridge leading to the cave, he saw smoke rising from it and smelled burning 
paper. He thought, "Are my books being burned?" When he entered 
the cave, he saw there was almost nothing left except the empty wooden covers! He felt as if his heart had been torn asunder. "Where are 
my books?" he cried to the Jetsun in great resentment. Milarepa replied, "You have been away for so long fetching water, that I thought 
you were dead and so I have burned all the unimportant books. As 
far as I am concerned, they were useless, and are merely temptations 
to distract one's mind and hinder one's devotion. By the way, what 
made you linger so long?" 
In his pride, Rechungpa thought, "My Guru has now become very 
bitter and egoistic. He has affronted me sorely. Should I return to 
Dipupa and stay with him again or should I go elsewhere?" Thinking 
thus, Rechungpa lost all faith in the Jetsun. He sat there deadly quiet 
for some time. Then he said, "I was watching the wild goats at play, 
that's why I was late. Now the gold you gave me and the hardship 
I underwent in India have all become meaningless and wasted. I am 
leaving for another country now." Saying this, Rechungpa became 
hostile and disdainful to the Jetsun out of his bad faith toward him. 
Milarepa then said, "My son Rechungpa, you do not have to lose all 
your faith in me. All this should be blamed on your dalliance. If you 
want to be amused, I can entertain you. Now watch!" 
Instantaneously, this wondrous vision took form: Upon Milarepa's 
head the Translator Marpa appeared clearly as Dorje-Chang, sitting 
upon the sun and moon Lotus Seat of Gems. Encircling him were the 
Gurus of the Transmission. To the right and left of Milarepa's eyes and 
ears, shone two suns and moons. From his nostrils streamed rays of light 
of five different colors like silk threads, from his eyebrows shone a radiant light. His tongue became a small eight-petaled lotus-seat with a 
sun and moon orb above it, from which sparkled brilliant and extremely fine letters - vowels and consonants - as if written by a single, 
split hair. From his heart rayed forth other beams of light, which then 
turned into numerous small birds. Whereupon, Milarepa sang: 
Hearken to me, my son Rechungpa! 

--- PAGE 464 ---
Above my head, 
Upon the sun-moon orb of the Lion Seat 
Sits my Gracious Guru Marpa -
The divine embodiment of Buddha Dorje-Changl 
Round him like a string of jewels 
Are the Gurus of the Lineage. 
If you behold them with faithful eyes 
You will be blessed by the rain of grace, 
And fulfilled will be your wishes. 
Interesting it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 
On the tips of my ears 
A sun and moon shine, glowing as a radiant rainbow. 
This reveals the Union of Wisdom and Skill, 
This proves my steadfast Illumination. 
Amazing it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 
The five-colored rays from my nostrils, 
Streaming like jewelled threads, 
Are the essence of sound, a marvel. 
This shows my mastery of PraQa 
Through the Vajra-reciting Yoga.1 
This proves that I have entered 
The Central Channel of my Life-Force. 
Amazing it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 
At the mid-point between my eyes, 
Appears the auspicious sign of the radiant 
Dsudbhu;2 
This shows the essence of pure form, 
This proves the blessed radiance of Buddha's 
compassion! 
Amazing it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 

--- PAGE 465 ---
Rechungpa' s Repentance 
A red lotus with eight petals opens in my mouth, 
Adorned with a garland of consonants and vowels. 
They are the symbols of all Vajra teachingsThat which is without end or limitation. 
Beholding them with reverent eyes, 
You will realize all Dharmas are your speech. 
Amazing it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment. 
From the center of my heart stream 
Glowing beams of light. 
This shows the Trikaya's immutability, 
This shows the unity of mercy and the Void. 
Amazing it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Rechungpa, however, paid no attention to the Jetson's advice, but 
sat there silently and in deep resentment. He looked askance at the 
mintculous scene, but showed not the slightest sign of interest in it. 
Then he said, "There is nothing surprising in all this; it is more amus- · 
ing to watch the play of goats!" Although the Jetsun had worked such 
a great miracle, Rechungpa showed neither interest nor admiration, 
but continued to demand that the Jetsun give back his books. For a 
while he merely sat there in persistent indignation and silence. Then 
he [got up], stamped heavily, and sat down again. Putting his elbows 
on his knees, and resting his chin on his hand~, he began to hum 
[meaninglessly]. 
In the meantime, the Jetsun's body had become radiantly transparent; on his Secret Center appeared Buddha Dorje Danyi, on his Navel 
Center appeared Buddha Dem Chog, on his Heart Center, Buddha 
Jeba Dorje, on his Throat Center, Buddha Mahamaya, between his 
eyebrows, Buddha Sakyamuni, and upon his head, Buddha Sungwong 
Duba, all encircled by many deities and their retinues. These divine 
bodies, vivid,. yet devoid of any self-nature, were all distinctly visible 
under a great five-colored canopy of light. Whereupon, Milarepa sang: 
My body is the Infinite Palace of Goddesses, 
Wherein dwell all Buddhas [in the Universe]. 
In my Secret Center, where Bliss is preserved, 
Dwells the Buddha Dorje Danyi and his retinue, 
Glorifying my sealed Cakra of Bliss. 
He embodies Buddha's Innate Wisdom. 

--- PAGE 466 ---
In the Conjuration Cakra at my navel 
Dwells the Buddha Dem Chog and his retinue; 
This is the Cakra and two-and-sixty gods, 
Where in essence dwells the Vajra Body. 
In the Dharma Cakra in my heart 
Dwells Buddha Jedor and nine deities; 
They are the Essence of the Three Sattvas [?]. 
This is the Cakra of the Vajra Mind. 
In the Enjoyment Cakra in my throat 
Dwells the Buddha Mahiimiiya and his retinue, 
Symbolizing the enjoyment of all forms. 
This is the Cakra where the Vajra is expressed. 
In the White Conch Cakra between my eyebrows 
Dwells Buddha Siikyamuni and many deities; 
He is the symbol of Wisdom and Merits. 
This is the Cakra of Unity! 
In the Great Bliss Cakra in my head 
Dwells Buddha Sungwong Duba and many gods; 
This is the Cakra of Great Bliss, 
Where the NiiQiS and Bindus both unite. 
Son, if you can identify your self with the Buddha, 
The Divine Body will vividly appear; 
Your flesh and blood will be transformed into 
the Rainbow Body. 
Of all marvels, this is most maiVellous. 
Son, do not lose your faith 
But increase your veneration! 
Rechungpa said, "Your miracles are indeed wonderful, but my mind 
will not be at ease if I cannot have my books back, so please return 
them to me." The Jetsun then passed through rocks and other obstacles, flew by on a rock, walked and sat on water, poured fire and 
water from his body, flew through and sat in the sky, and transformed 
his body from one to many and from many to one. While doing so 
he sang: 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment. 
Look, nothing can impede me! 
This proves my mind with all forms has merged. 

--- PAGE 467 ---
Rechungpa' s Repentance 
That I can ride upon a rock, flying through the air, 
Proves I have mastered outer objects. 
Walking on water as on earth 
Proves I have unified the Four Elements. 
The flow of fire and water from my body 
Proves I have mastered all the Elements. 
Transforming one body into many 
And many into one, 
Proves I can benefit all beings 
By miracles. 
Sitting, walking, and lying in the sky 
Proves my PrJQa rests in the Central Channel. 
Amazing it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Son, if you lose not your faith, 
Your prayers will be fulfilled. 
Rechungpa said, "Your miracles are like child's play, you have demonstrated them so much that instead of being interesting. they are dull 
and tiring. If you are really compassionate, please return me my books." 
Milarepa replied, "My son, do not lose faith in your Father! If you 
pray sincerely, you will rea1ize that all manifestations are holy books. 
Now try to pray to me for this realization!" 
Then Milarepa went to a narrow path used by merchants on their 
way to Drin. There he picked up a huge rock [that blocked the path], 
cut [a part of it] into pieces [with his hands] as if slicing a cake, 
threw the bits into the sky as if spraying water, and stamped on the 
[remaining] rock as though trampling on soft clay. Finally, with one 
hand, he threw this huge rock into the river in the valley below, and 
sang: 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 
On this narrow [mountain] path 
Stood an iron rock with eight edges. 
Its right edge was brushed when travellers mounted, 
Its left when they the path descended. 
One hundred blacksmiths with their hammers 
Could not have split this gigantic stone; 
A fire heated by one hundred bellows 
Could not have melted it. 
But behold, 
I sliced it as I would cut a cake, 
I threw the bits as I would sprinkle water, 

--- PAGE 468 ---
I stamped upon it as I would trample mud, 
And flung it like an arrow from a bow. 
If with faith you look upon your father, 
Wish-fulfilling rain will fall upon you; 
The treasury of wish-fulfillment will be realized. 
Interesting it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare to this wondrous game? 
Try, my son, to change your mind at once! 
Still without faith in the Jetsun, Rechungpa said, "If you can perform the miracle of restoring my books I shall then have faith in 
you, otherwise I shall not be happy or satisfied." Whereupon, as though 
spreading wings, Milarepa held out his robe and flew straight into the 
sky above the precipice of the Red Rock. He fluttered and hovered 
there like a hawk, and then darted to the ground like a flash of 
lightning. While performing these miracles he sang: 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 
Here, on the peak of Red Rock stands 
Sky Castle. Flying over it, 
A huge hawk flaps its wings, 
While small birds shake in fright. 
No human being has flown here before, 
None will fly here again. 
Now look at this old mari in flight, 
Look at him soaring 
Like a vulture in the sky. 
See, he hovers like a hawk, 
Darts to the ground like lightning, 
And floats cloud-like in the air! 
If you have faith in miracles 
Through mastering the body, 
Practice that mastery; 
Then you can conquer and· unite Saq1sara and NirviiQa. 
Amazing it may be to watch the play of goats, 
But how can it compare with this wondrous game? 
Try, my son Rechungpa, to straighten out your 
mind! 
Milarepa's miracles, however, did not overly impress Rechungpa. He 
only glanced at them indifferently and still had no faith in the Jetsun. 
Then, once mont, Milarepa held out his robe like a bird spreading 
its wings, and flew into the sky. There he sang: 

--- PAGE 469 ---
Rechungpa' s Repentance 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 
On the peak of Red Rock in the Mon Mountains 
Suddenly appeared a flock of goats 
Without any reason, 
A spontaneous play 
Of non-arising Reality. 
One goat played the wolf, 
Chasing the flock o'er the ridge. 
This symbolized the awareness 
And the conquest of one's foibles; 
This indicated the crossing 
O'er the mount of dualism; 
This was Milarepa's conjuration 
To show Rechungpa the essential teachings! 
To the miracles of your Father 
You showed indifference, 
But in the play of goats 
You showed great interest; 
This is indeed the sign 
That you have lost your mind. 
I have showed you such great miracles 
Yet you have no faith in me. 
When I think of men like you, 
Faithless disciples a11, 
At this time of defilement 
I feel sad, and sick at heart. 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment! 
Hard horn, and solid wood, 
Can be bent if one tries; 
But a harsh mind is hard to "bend." 
Rechuf!gpa, try to subdue your mind within! 
Fierce tigers in the South, 
And wild yaks in the North 
· Can be tamed if one tries; 
But pride and egotism are hard to tame. 
Rechungpa, try to subdue conceit within! 
Mice under the ground, 
And birds in the sky 
--- PAGE 470 ---
Can be caught if one tries; 
But a lost mind is hard to catch. 
Rechungpa, try your own faults to see! 
The Dharma of words 
And speculation 
Can be learned if one tries; 
But the void Self-mind is hard to learn. 
Rechungpa, try to meditate on the uncreated mind! 
A son may leave his father 
And his loving mother too, 
But a bad temperament is hard to leave behind. 
Rechungpa, try to change your temper and conceit! 
Jewels, house, and land 
One renounces if one tries; 
But to renounce pleasure-craving is hard. 
Rechungpa, try to give up your desire for pleasure! 
Good jewels and a lovely sweetheart 
If need be can be left, 
But to leave a soft, warm bed is hard indeed. 
Rechungpa, try to give up the "blind" sleep 
of a corpse! 
Here and there hills and rocks 
May meet face to face, 
But to see the Self-face of your mind is hard. 
The queen's and king's decrees 
Can be evaded if one tries; 
But no one can evade 
Yama, the Lord of Death. 
Rechungpa, make use of death for your devotion! 
My son, try to correct your wrong ideas, 
Abandon your bad actions, 
Discipline your unruly mind, 
Your impious thoughts restrain, 
Avoid the demon of egotism. 
When I come to die this shall I will for you; 
No profounder teaching can I give you in my life. 

--- PAGE 471 ---
Rechungpa' s Repentance 
Rechungpa, my son, bear my words in mind! 
As Milarepa sang, he flew higher and higher into the sky until he 
disappeared. [Then, of a sudden,] Rechungpa was filled with remorse, 
and an unusual faith toward the Jetsun burst forth within him. He 
thought, "Because I could not control my temper and give away those 
worthless books, I have lost my Jetsun Guru. I have paid too great a 
price for those worthless books. The Jetsun has performed such great 
miracles for me, yet I still had no faith in him. Now he has forsaken 
me as though shedding a heavy burden, and has gone to the Oakini's 
Pure Land. An unbeliever such as I can never be born there. What is 
the use of books without a Guru? I shall throw myself over this cliff 
and meet my death. I now make my last wish: In all my future incarnations may I always meet the Jetsun, and may my mind ever be 
at-one with his!" Having made this wish, Rechungpa plunged into the 
abyss below with every determination [to die]. He crashed on a great 
rock, from where he saw the shadow of the Jetsun. Crying with all his 
strength, he called to .Milarepa in a most pitiful voice, and tried to 
fly after him, but could not do so. Nevertheless, he managed to walk 
[in the air] after Milarepa's shadow until he reached the waist of Red 
Rock cliff. He could not go a step farther but could see the Jetsun 
and hear his voice. 
He saw Milarepa sitting in a cavity hollowed out from the side of 
the cliff with his other two transformed bodies sitting beside him, all 
singing together in response to Rechungpa's call of repentance: 
Rechungpa, listen to me for a moment. 
Look, from one Father Jetsun emanate two others! 
To them you should confess your sins, 
Of them you should ask of their well-being, 
From them you should receive the Tantric Precepts, 
And ask for Initiations and Instructions. 
Of them you should beg the profound Demonstration, 
In them should you take refuge, 
And place your confidence. 
If you have faith in my miracles, 
Your pride will be curtailed. 
III deeds indicate the victory of Yama; 
If of him you are afraid 
You should abstain from vices. 
Bad thoughts hinder one's devotion, 
So of them repent. 

--- PAGE 472 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MU.AREPA 
As the tears poured down his face, Rechungpa sang: 
Listen to me, Father Guru, 
Embodiment of wisdom and of blessings. 
Listen to Rechungpa, your blind and impious son, 
Who had no faith in your miracles. 
Listen, Jetsun Guru in the center, 
To you I make obeisance, and offerings. 
Of you I ask of your well-being and confess my sins. 
Oh, my Father Guru, it was you 
Who gave me the Precepts, Initiations, and 
Instructions, 
It was you who enlightened me 
And gave me a lasting refuge. 
Save me, I pray, from stumbling, 
Protect me with your mercy, 
Safeguard this poor and impious mendicant. 
Rechungpa managed to reach the place where Milarepa sat, and then 
hugged him with such great and overpowering emotion that he fainted. When he came to, Milarepa brought him back to the hermitage. 
The Jetsun then said to Rechungpa, "If you wish to attain Buddhahood, you must practice the Pith-Instructions. Those books of polemics 
and the evil Mantras of the heretics had no value for us. The Formless Teachings of the I)akinis are good and sound -
these I did not 
burn, but I burned all the rest because they would only have caused 
one to fall into the Lower Realms, in spite of one's original intention to attain Buddhahood. Now hearken to my song: 
Rechungpa, my son, 
Whom from childhood I have cherished, 
You went to India for the Pith-Instructions 
But have brought back books full of arguments. 
You were thus exposed to the danger 
Of becoming a debater. 
You wanted to be a yogi, 
But books like those and their ideas 
Could make you a pompous preacher! 
To know both one and all, that was your wish; 
But if you are caught up iii endless words, 
You will wreck the most important one. 
Your intention was to understand the Dharma, 
But if you are caught up in endless acts, 

--- PAGE 473 ---
Rechungpa's Repentance 
Greedy and arrogant will you become. 
The immaculate Dharma for which I sent you 
Has flown into the crevice of a rock 
And is preserved by the :Oakinis; 
You may recover it if you pray sincerely. 
I have burned the magic books and evil Mantras 
As an offering to the God of Fire; 
Many will be helped by this. 
Do not lose your temper, 
Lest you be scorched by anger; 
Do not distress yourself or grieve, 
For that will hurt your mind and body. 
Do not bestir yourself with many things, 
But relax, and sit at ease, 
Remembering your Guru 
And his grace and bounties! 
Rechungpa thought, "My Guru's words are absolutely true and do 
not differ from the Buddha's. I will now pray the Dakinis to give me 
back my books." He sat and prayed, and in a short while the Formless :Oakini Teachings, together with other books that were beneficial 
to the Dharma and to sentient beings, all miraculously returned to 
Rechungpa's hand. He was delighted beyond all measure. He confirmed and imprinted on his mind a faith that Milarepa was Buddha 
Himself. He thought, "So far, I have served the Jetsun in many ways. 
Hereafter, I will serve him even better than before." This vow he kept, 
and lived up to it all his life. 
. 
Now, the disciples and patrons gathered to welcome Rechungpa. 
From the assembly Sevan Repa arose and said, "You must have 
learned and brought back from India both the Pith-Instructions, as 
prophesied by the Jetsun, and the science of logic. Now please tell 
us, how can we win a dispute should we ever become involved in 
one?" Milarepa said, "Rechungpa, you may tell them how to 'win' a 
dispute in the light of the :Oakinis' [teachings]." In response, Rechungpa sang: 
The great Transmission Buddha, Dorje-Chang, 
Will quench all disputes in the Lineage. 
Our Guru, Buddha-Repa, will end 
The disputes of craving teachers. 
The Pith-Instructions and the Transmission's 
Skillful Path 
Will quench all evil argument 

--- PAGE 474 ---
Derived from constant thinking. 
The omnipresent Mirror of Equality 
Will reveal all concealed vices. 
The precious teachings of the Great Bliss 
Will burn all wandering thoughts in its Wisdom 
flame. 
The Na<;lis and PraJ)as in the Cakras 
Will dispel at once all drowsiness and distractions. 
The Teaching of the self-liberating Mahamudra 
Will conquer the demon of ego-clinging to the 
Five Consciousnesses. 
The Teaching of the radiant Wisdom Lamp 
Will dispel darkness and ignorance. 
The Act of Chu La3 Swordsmanship 
Will cut, with ease, the ties of worldly desire. 
Milarepa commented, "What you have said is very good. But in 
addition, we need the Instructions on the View and Practice. Now 
listen to my song: 
The View is the wisdom of the Void, 
The Practice is the illumination of non-clinging, 
The Action is the everlasting play without desire, 
The Fruit is great immaculate Nakedness. 
Concerning the view of Void-Wisdom, 
The danger is to miss it 
Through words and thoughts. 
If absolute knowledge 
Has not been gained within, 
Words alone can never free one from ego-clinging. 
Thus, you should strive for true understanding. 
Concerning the practice of Illumination free 
from clinging, 
The danger is to miss it 
By adhering to mere concentration. 
If Wisdom has not shone within, 
Steady and deep concentration by itself 
Will never lead to Liberation. 
Wisdom never comes 
With distractions and drowsiness; 
You should thus work hard on mindfulness. 

--- PAGE 475 ---
Rechungpa' s Repentance 
Concerning perpetual Action without desires, 
The danger is to miss it 
By indulging in idle talk. 
Before all appearances have become 
Aids in one's meditation practice, 
"T antric Acts" will be 
Worldly desires disguised. 
You should thus strive for purity and non-clinging! 
Concerning the immaculate Fruit of Nakedness, 
The danger is to miss it through your thought. 
If ignorances are not purged within, 
Hard effort will bring but small results. 
You should thus strive to wipe out ignorance. 
All present at the meeting were convinced by the truth of this song, 
and all were inspired with joy. 
This is the story of the wild goats. 
NOTES 
I Vajra-reciting Yoga (T.T.: rDo.rJe.bZlas.Pa.): A very important breathing 
exercise almost indispensible to all Tantric Yoga practices, it is also called the "Three 
Vajra Words Recitation." Describing this exercise briefty, the yogi recites the "Om!' 
upon inhaling, "Ah" at the pause, and "Hum" upon exhaling, thus coordinating a 
complete breathing process with the recitation of three essential Vajra words. 
2 Dsudbhu (T.T.: mDsod.sPu.): a circle of hair between the eyebrows in the 
middle of the forehead, one of the thirty-two superb marks of a Buddha, from 
which he sends forth divine rays of light. 
3 The text reads: "sPyod.Pa.Chu.La.Ral.Gri.Yis.". The meaning of "Chu.La." 
is very obscure. "Chu" originally means water; it could therefore be interpreted as 
Act-of-ftuidity- denoting the non-clinging and all-free attitude of an enlightened 
mind. 
· 

--- PAGE 476 ---
THE SONG OF "HOW 
TO GAIN HAPPINESS AND 
A VOID SUFFERING" 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A
T THE feast held for Rechungpa on his return from India by the 
patrons and disciples of Red Rock and Bouto, Jetsun Milarepa prophesied the coming of the peerless Cambopa. Then he was 
invited by the patrons to remain in Chu Bar. [While Milarepa was 
there], a great yogi [mediator] of the Lan tribe, having heard of his 
reputation and filled with enthusiasm and aspiration, arrived from 
Dagbo. As soon as he saw the Jetsun a Samadhi of bliss, illumination and non-thought arose within him. His faith confirmed, he said 
to Milarepa, "I am a yogi from Dagbo. I have learned many teachings, 
including the Great Perfection, from several Gurus; I have also practiced the Meditation-of-Distinctive-Observations/ and the [Tantric] 
Action-of-Equality.2 I am not satisfied with the shallow experiences of 
mere understanding and have been greatly inspired by your reputation, therefore I now come to you for the Dharma. Please be kind 
enough to grant me the Instructions." The Jetsun asked, "Have you 
yet had these Experiences during your devotion? Now listen to my 
song": 
Have you missed the holy Guru's Pith-Instructions, 
Because of mere verbal knowledge? 
Have you missed the profound Distinct Wisdom 
Because of your Two Clingings? 
Have you lost the view of profound insight 
Because of the hindrance of dualism? 
In practicing the Meditation-of-No-Perception 
--- PAGE 477 ---
The Song of "How to Gain Happiness and Avoid Suffering" 
Have you fallen into the pitfall of forms? 
In practicing the Action-of-Equality 
Have you gone astray through indulgence and 
skepticism? 
Have you failed to understand that Nirvat:~a's fruit 
Is found within yourself? 
Have you thought the false experiences, 
Contrary to the sayings of the Tantras, 
To be genuine and sound? 
Have you missed the intrinsically void Mind-Essence 
By obstructing it with artificial thought? 
When you practiced Yoga in solitude 
Were you misled by demons in disguise? 
As a potter turns his wheel, 
The forces of ignorance 
Tum one ever in Safllsara. 
The yogi replied, "It is true that I have been like that. Now please 
initiate and instruct me in order to correct these faults." Milarepa 
granted his request and set him to meditate. After some time, the yogi, 
now called Lan Com Repa, was still unable to get rid of his attachment to virtues, still thinking them to be concrete and with definite 
form. Many wandering thoughts rose in his mind, so that he could 
not free it; he had an urge to visit the town, and so forth. Milarepa 
was fully aware of this, so when Lan Com Repa came to report his 
Experience and progress he said, "Lan Com, you should not cling to 
the formality of virtuous deeds, but try to subdue your wandering 
thoughts about going to the town, and concentrate on your meditation; otherwise you can never free yourself from the Three Realms of 
Safllsara. Take heed of these things." Then Milarepa sang: 
For him who keeps the tradition of the Lineage 
All errors vanish in the Ultimate, 
All things come with ease at the right time. 
He who acts like this is a true yogi. 
In the practice of Mahamudra 
There is no room for thinking with a clinging mind. 
When Realization of the State-Beyond-Playwords 
arises 
There is no need to chant or keep the rules. 
Yogis wandering in towns 

--- PAGE 478 ---
Always yield themselves 
To the will and favor 
Of relatives and friends. 
Their actions become pretentious, 
Their talk nonsensical. 
The light of the Void by hypocrisy is dimmed. 
If in town one pays no attention to what people 
feel, 
Troubles and worries will rain upon him. 
To avoid fear and regret at the time of dying, 
To escape the fatal chasm of Sarpsara, 
One should conquer the enemy- desire. 
Remember always transiency and death, 
i\.nd ever meditate in solitude. 
He who observes not his mind nakedly, 
Becomes apathetic and indifferent. 
He who prays not with earnestness, 
Is prone to be misled by false experiences. 
If with great diligence and perseverance 
He does not practice the profound teaching of 
the Skillful-Path, 
He is prone to be vanquished by desires. 
If he remains in a hermitage, 
Merits will surely grow within him. 
Lan Gom Repa thought, "The Jetsun's words have hit the crux of the 
matter: he is right about my faults." So he meditated in a hermitage 
without distraction until he gained superb Realizations. Then he came 
to report this progress to the Jetsun. Greatly pleased, Milarepa said, 
"That is very good; but you should still continue to practice like this 
until you attain Buddhahood. These are the important things you 
should always remember: 
A son, a wife, and fame 
Are three fetters for a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should abandon them! 
Goods, enjoyments, and prestige 
Are three hindrances to a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should abjure them! 

--- PAGE 479 ---
The Song of "How to Gain Happiness and Avoid Suffering" 
Relatives, patrons, and disciples 
Are three obstacles to a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should forsake them! 
Wine, fatigue, and sleep 
Are three robbers of a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should avoid them! 
Chatting, joking, and entertainment 
Are three distractions to a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should abjure them! 
The Guru, the Instruction, and diligence 
Are three refuges for a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should e'er rely on them! 
Solitude, merits, and good companions 
Are three staffs for a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should ever use them. 
Non-distraction, non-thought, and bliss 
Are three good friends to a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should e'er consort with them! 
Relaxation, spontaneity, and naturalness 
Are the three attributes of a yogi; 
A Dharma-practicer should ever keep them! 
Non-desire, non-hate, and supernormal powers 
Are three signs of a yogi's success; 
A Dharma-practicer should e'er achieve them! 
Lan Com Repa said, "Because of your blessing I have now relinquished all that should be relinquished, and can practice the right 
Dharma spontaneously and with ease. I feel happy and cheerful all 
the time." The Jetsun replied, "Yes, my son, this is correct. A yogi 
who has completely abandoned all the faults and acquired all the 
merits is always happy. If he does the opposite he will suffer all the 
time. Therefore, he should always discriminate between right and 
wrong for his own happiness and safety. Whereupon, he sang a song, 
"How to Gain Happiness and Avoid Suffering": 
He who knows his own nature 

--- PAGE 480 ---
46Q 
And the immanent Truth, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who wrongly acts 
Is ever sad. 
He who rests in the state of nature 
And is ever spontaneously pure, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who surrenders to impulses and environments, 
Being subject to hatred and to cravings, 
Is ever sad. 
He who realizes that all things are the Dharmakaya, 
Freed from all fears, hopes, and doubts, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who is impatient, talkative, and rash, 
Being overpowered by worldly desires, 
Is ever sad. 
He who knows that all things are his mind, 
That all with which he meets are friendly, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who squanders his life away, 
Carrying remorse to his grave, 
Is ever sad. 
He who has a thorough Realization, 
At ease in the self-sustaining Reality, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who is enslaved by his desires, 
Insatiable and always longing, 
Is ever sad. 
He who is freed from all forms without effort, 
Always immersed in the Experience, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who merely follows words, 
Unseeing of the mind, 
Is ever sad. 
He who renounces all worldly things, 
Free from worry and consideration, 
Is ever joyful. 

--- PAGE 481 ---
The Song of "How to Gain Happiness and Avoid Suffering" 
A Buddhist who measures and stores up grain, 
Cherishing the women and relatives he loves, 
Is ever sad. 
A yogi who discards all worldly ties, 
Realizing all is magic and illusion, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who diverts himself, taxing 
His body and mind with sensuality, 
Is ever sad. 
A yogi who rides the horse of diligence 
Towards the Land of Liberation, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who is weighted with a stone 
That pulls him to the bottom of Sarpsara 
Is ever sad. 
He who avoids misunderstandings, 
Amused at the play of his own mind, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who has sworn to practice Dharma 
But indulges in sinful deeds, 
Is ever sad. 
He who has done away with fears, and hopes, and 
doubts, 
Perpetually absorbed in the State of Origin, 
Is ever joyful. 
He who submits to the will of othersObsequious, artificial, and ingratiating, 
Is ever sad. 
He who leaves all "this and that" behind, 
Always practicing pure Dharma, 
Is ever joyful. 
Lan Com Repa and the other disciples were all greatly inspired 
[and filled with] joy. With the power of absorbing themselves in the 
unwavering Samadhi of Mahamudra, they were able to further their 
spiritual progress in this magic-like world of forms. The Jetsun was 

--- PAGE 482 ---
very pleased with Lan Gom Repa, who later became the patron, the 
disciple, and the Dharma brother of the Dagpo Rinpoche [Gambopal. 
This is the story of Milarepa's intimate son, Lan Gom Repa. 
NOTES 
I Meditation-of-Distinctive-Observations, or Meditation and Observation of 
the Distinctive Wisdom (T.T.: So.So.rTog.Pahi.Shcs.Rab.Kyi.rTog.dPyod.). 
2 Action-of-Equality (T.T.: Ro.sl.Qoms.): To set one free from fear and 
hope, likes and dislikes, Tantrism provides a practice for advanced yogis, known 
as the "Action of Equality." In the execution of this practice, the yogi is urged to do 
things against the standard of conventional values. 

--- PAGE 483 ---
THE HOLY 
GAMBOPA-MILAREPA'S 
FOREMOST DISCIPLE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
M
ARPA, in his interpretation of Milarepa's significant Dream of the 
Four Pillars,1 foretold that the supremely exalted Gambopa, the 
heart-son of the great Yogi, Mila the Laughing Vajra, would appear 
as the Peerless Sage. The Patron Buddha, Vajra I)akinl, also told Milarepa that he would have one disciple like the sun, another like the moon, 
and twenty-five accomplished disciples like stars, and that Gambopa 
would be the foremost of all, like the sun. 
The all-perfect Buddha, Saykamuni Himself, also prophesied the 
coming of Gambopa in the Royal Samadhi Sutra and elsewhere. For 
instance, in the Great Compassion Lotus Siitra,2 Buddha says: "Ananda! In the future, after my Nirvat:Ja, a monk called the Physician 
[T.T.: hTso.Byad.] will appear in the North. He rendered outst~nd­
ing services to the previous Buddha after having served hundreds of 
thousands of Buddhas in his former lives. He is well grounded in virtues and supreme thoughts and has entered the immaculate Path of 
Mahayana for the benefit and happiness of many sentient beings. He 
will appear as a well-informed man, highly versed in the Scriptures of 
the Bodhisattva's Doctrine, who speaks the words of the Great Vehicle and demonstrates faultlessly and perfectly the Mahayana teaching." 
And so at this time of five defilements, appeared in Tibet, the Snow 
Country of the North, Dagbo Lhaje [the Physician from Dagbo] 
whose fame was heard in all lands. He was a great Bodhisattva who 
had reached the Tenth (Final) Stage of the Path, and realized its direct insight. The Jetsun Milarepa foresaw him in his illuminating 
Samadhi. He blessed Gambopa with the grace of Samadhi, and at-
--- PAGE 484 ---
tracted him with his mind power. It was he, the great Gambopa, who 
dawned upon the Buddhist religion and brought many sentient beings to the great Bodhi-Path. His life story is vast like the mighty ocean, 
of which this epitome of his biography is [but] a single drop. 
The Lord Gambopa was born in the Seba Valley of Nyal in Tibet. 
His family was the Nyi Wa. His father, a physician called Wutso Gabar Jalbo, had two wives, Yunlaza and Sangdan Dranma, each of 
whom gave birth to a son. Gambopa was the eldest, and was called 
Dunba Dharmadraug. His father, being an excellent consultant in 
worldly affairs, trained him well so that he became proficient in speech 
and in consultation. When Gambopa was fifteen he had already 
learned many Tantric teachings of the Ningmaba, such as the Basic 
Tantra of Sungwa Nyinbo, Heruka Galbo, the Tantras of the Wrathful and Peaceful Buddhas and of the Great Merciful Net-Holder, and 
many other teachings of the Old School. He had also mastered the 
eight branches of medical science taught by his father. 
At twenty-two he married the sister of the powerful [local] chieftain, Dharma Aui. She had all the admirable qualities of a lady. They 
had a son and daughter, but [a pestilence broke out in that area, 
and] the son died. Gambopa accompanied the corpse to the cemetery, and when he returned home, found that his daughter had also 
died. A few days later his wife caught the same disease. Every kind 
of medical treatment was tried, and prayers were repeated and sacraments held, but in vain. 
After suffering great pain for a long time, she was still trying desperately to hold on to life. [Sitting beside her pillow] Gambopa recited the holy Siitras to her. He thought, "She has been trying so 
hard to cling to life under such an ordeal, and will not let herself 
die peacefully. This must be due to her extreme attachmept to something." 
He then said to her, "Those who do not understand the true nature of Saqtsara are toilworn and overburdened; those who are compelled to linger in Sarpsara are miserable and pitiful. I am indeed 
sorry for those unenlightened people who are subject to intense attachment to their dream-like consorts and relatives. You will not let 
yourself die peacefully after enduring such a prolonged, unbearable 
ordeal. This must be due to your clinging to something or someone. 
If it is the house and land that you cannot abandon, I will offer them 
to the monks. If it is the jewels that you cannot give up, I will give 
them to the priests and the poor. What else is there that you cannot 
bear to leave? We met in this life because of our mutual vows in 
previous lives. But because of your bad Kanna you have now caught 

--- PAGE 485 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
this disease. I have tried everything to help, but have only made you 
suffer more. [This painful lesson has taught me] to decide that no 
matter whether you live or die, I shall devote my whole life to the 
Dharma." 
His wife said, "I am now about to die. I am not attached to the 
land, the house, my jewels, or anything else. It is you that I cannot 
give up. I shall send for my brother [Dharma Aui] to prevent your 
being seduced by women. Besides, [as you have said], family life in 
Saq1sara is without true happiness. I hope, my dear husband and physician, that you will now devote your body and soul to the Dharma." 
Gambopa replied, "Even if you recover from this disease, we cannot stay together forever. If you die, I will .devote my life to practicing the Dharma and will not marry again. Do you want me to swear 
to it before you?" 
His wife said, "I know you are a man who will never go back on 
your word, but in order to set my mind at rest I would like you to 
take an oath before me. Please fetch a witness." 
Gambopa -then called in his uncle, Balsud, to be the witness, put 
the holy Siitra, written with golden words, upon his head and took 
the oath. His wife said, "My dear physician, I shall see from a crack 
in my grave whether or not you dedicate your life to the Dharma!" 
Saying this, she took her husband's hand, gazed into his face with her 
eyes full of tears, and died. 
Gambopa then divided his property into three parts, using one to 
pay for his wife's funeral and offerings, another for meritorious charities, and the third to provide for learning and practicing the Dharma. 
He then cremated his wife's corpse, built a stiipa, and made a number of Tsa Tsa3 Buddha images with her ashes and bones. Later this 
stiipa became very famous, and people called it Jomo Chod Dan (the 
Stiipa of the Hostess). It can still be seen in the region of Nyal. 
After the funeral and winding up his affairs, Gambopa felt very much 
at ease. He thought, "It is now time for me to practice the Dharma." 
He then went alone to Nyi Tong and meditated there. 
Gambopa's uncle, Balsud, thought, "My poor nephew must be 
heartbroken after the loss of his dear wife. I must go to console him." 
So he went to see Gambopa, taking with him much wine and meat. 
During their talk Gambopa said to his uncle, "Since my wife passed 
away I have been feeling very much at ease and happy." This remark 
made Balsud exceedingly angry. "Where could you find as good a 
woman as your [late] wife?", he cried indignantly. "Had Dharma Aui 
heard of this, he would have said that you were breaking the oath!" 
With this, he threw a handful of dust in Gambopa's face. Gambopa 
merely replied, "My dear Uncle, have you forgotten the oath I made 

--- PAGE 486 ---
before my wife with you as a witness? Am I not practicing the Dharma 
as I promised?" 
"Nephew, you are quite right," said Balsud. "Though I have grown 
old like this, I seldom think of the Dharma. I really feel very much 
ashamed of myself! Prosper, my nephew, in your Dharma practice; I 
will take good ca~e of your land and property." 
After some time, without his relatives' knowledge, Gambopa went 
to the Bodor Monastery in the Pan region. There he saw Lama Bodorwa Rinchinsal, to whom he said, "Precious Lama, I am a native 
of Nyal, and I have come here for the Dharma. Please guide me 
through its gate and keep me for a time." 
Bodorwa replied, "I have no charity to give you. You must provide 
your own food and clothing if you want to learn the Dharma." Gambopa thought, "If I had the means, I would not ask. According to 
the Tantra of Sungwa Nyinpo, to benefit sentient beings a Guru 
should have four kinds of compassion- the constant compassion, 
the spontaneous compassion, the compassion of granting benediction 
and prayers, and the compassion of guiding the disciples according to 
their needs. Only thus can a Guru help sentient beings. This Guru 
seems to be lacking in compassion. I doubt whether my Karma is 
linked with his, and I cannot venerate him." 
He soon returned to his native land and prepared sixteen ounces 
of gold as a means for studying the Dharma. Then he went to the 
Jhajogri Monastery at Pan, received ordination from Lama Jhachil as 
a Bhik~u [a fully ordained monk) and was given the name of Sudnam Rinchin, the Precious Meritorious One. 
Then under Professors Shapa Linpa and Shadulwa Tsinpa, Gambopa studied the Sastras of Dodejan (Mahayana Siitralankara), Ngundojan (Abhismayalankiira), Ngunbatso (Abhidharma Kosa), and others. In Mon, he studied the Tantras of Jedor, Sungdu, and others 
under Guru Lodan Sherab, and received the Initiations and Pith-Instructions from him. From Professors Nyurumpa and Jhajogripa, Gambopa learned numerous teachings of the Ghadamba School. Thinking, "Now I must practice these teachings," he meditated in Jhajogri. 
The Jefsun Gambopa was a man whose intelligence and compassion 
were great, whose clingings and desires were small, whose industriousness and faith toward the Dharma were prodigious, and whose 
apathy and indolence were negligible. By day he studied Buddhism 
diligently, and at night he meditated strictly; or he circumambulated, 
and performed other meritorious acts. [Because of his compassion and 
purity], no insect ever grew on his body.• He could live comfortably 
without food for five or six days, and his body always felt blissful. 
He could absorb himself in Samadhi for many days, and all crude 

--- PAGE 487 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
forms of lust, anger, and blindness dwindled away within him. As 
prophesied in the Golden Light Siitra5 all the signs preceding achievement of the Tenth Bhumi [the final and ultimate stage of Enlightenment of a Bodhisattva] had appeared unmistakably in his dreams. 
Some time afterwards, Gambopa had a vision in which he saw a 
green yogi dressed in rags, who put a hand upon his head, and, 
wetting a finger with spittle, flicked it in his face. He [at once] felt 
his Dhyana growing better and deeper. In addition, he gained a decisive [and immediate] understanding of Reality. In an Experience fraught with joy, his mind became clearer, lighter, and more 
alert than ever before. He told some monks in the town about this 
Experience, and they commented, "You were ordained a Bhik~u. and 
have been observing the immaculate precepts flawlessly. A monk like 
you, who dreams of yogis and the like, will come up against difficulties, for these premonitory dreams are conjured up by the [demon] 
Beghar. You should therefore go to your teacher, ask him to give 
you a holy recitation,6 and invite a large group of monks to bless 
you with the rite of One Hundred Dorma Offerings." This Gambopa 
did, yet the vision of the yogi appeared more often than before. 
At that time, in the Sunlight Happy Cave of Draugmar Bouto, the 
Jetsun Milarepa was setting in motion the wheel of Dharma, both of 
the Expedient and of the Ultimate Truth, for his heart-sons Rechung 
Dorje Dragpa, Shiwa Aui, Sevan Repa, and Ngan Tson Dunba; for his 
patrons Tsese of Orin, and Ku Ju, and for others. One day, the elders among the Repas said to Milarepa, "Jetsun, you are now very old. 
If one day you go to the Pure Land, we Repas will need someone who 
can act for you to help us in our difficulties and to further our progress on the Path. Our patrons also need a spiritual leader to increase their merits. Whom do you think can assume this responsibility? Whoever you have in mind should be given all the Pith-Instructions without reservation, and should be invested with power and status. Without such a man, neither our teachings nor our Lineage can 
spread widely, nor can our disciples be properly guided." Hearing 
their request, the Jetsun at first appeared slightly displeased. Then he 
replied, "Yes, indeed I shall have a good disciple, who will develop 
my teachings immensely. I shall, this evening, observe where he is 
and [will tell you] if you return early tomorrow morning." 
The next morning, Milarepa arose earlier than usual, summoned 
all his disciples and patrons, and said: 
"Like a Dharma-replenished vessel, the man who will receive my 
Pith-Instructions in full will soon come. He is a fully ordained monk, 
who bears the title of 'Physician,' and will hold my doctrine and 
spread it in all the Ten Directions. Last night I dreamed of his coming 

--- PAGE 488 ---
with a empty crystal vase, which I filled with nectar from my silver 
vase. This old father now has a son who will benefit numerous sentient beings and will illumine the doctrine of Buddha as the rising 
sun lights [the earth]. Oh, I am overflowing with joy and happiness!" 
In great delight Milarepa sang: 
I bow down to all Gurus, 
I pray to the Gracious Ones! 
In the East is found the White Lion's milk, 
The source of supreme strength; 
One will, unless one taste it, 
Never understand its power. 
Only after drinking can 
Its strength be felt most deeply, 
Yet only the Deva Indra can imbibe it. 
In the South, the great tiger 
Leaps with all his might; 
Great and majestic as this is, 
One can never understand it 
Without an actual contest. 
Only by vying with a tiger 
Can one fully appreciate its leap, 
But only the great Dombhi Heruka rides it. 
In the West, the Jurmo Fish has a bitter gall; 
Nothing in this world can taste more bitter, 
Yet, without directly sampling it, 
None can imagine how itfeels. 
Only after tasting it 
Can one fully understand its bitterness; 
But only the Dragon Gawojobo has experienced it. 
In the North, great is the power of the Blue 
Gem Dragon, 
Yet; without a formal contest, 
Its strength is never felt. 
Only after wrestling with this monster 
Can one fully understand its might, 
But only the athlete Deva Galugha matches it. 
The milk of the White Lioness in the East 

--- PAGE 489 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
Must be poured into a golden bowl, 
Not into any common vessel 
Lest the vessel break and the milk be lost. 
The holy teaching of Naropa and Medripa 
Is deep and most profound, 
Yet if one does not practice it, 
One sees nothing deep therein. 
Only after one has practiced can 
One fully understand its depth. 
This is the teaching my Father Marpa had! 
This is the teaching Milarepa practiced. 
Milarepa's Experience, insight, and instructions 
Are always most effective and precise, 
Yet those of little weight cannot receive them. 
They are only given to the able student, 
Yet they aU will be imparted 
To the monk, my coming heir. 
One day Gambopa went out for a walk of circumambulation. At 
the gate [of the monastery] he overheard three paupers talking about 
their urgent need, as a great famine had broken out that year. One 
of them remarked, "At a time like this, our kind monks of Jhajogri 
give timely preaching to aU Buddhists; they also invite everyone, without discrimination, to share their food. After we have eaten there, we 
can also beg a measure of the porridge left over and go to some 
pleasant place nearby to eat it together." Another suggested, "I have 
a better idea. Let us gather one full measure of half-ripened grain, make 
dough, and season it with pepper; then we can enjoy it together 
quietly in some abandoned house." The eldest said, "A cunning man 
always laughs and smiles, even if he is desperately hungry, while a 
good bird always flies like a vulture, even if it is starving. Let us, 
therefore, not say anything that might betray our yearning for food. 
Look! A Lama is coming this way! We had better not let him hear 
our conversation. It would shame us to be overheard. Besides, if you 
want to make a vow, you had better make a big one! Vow, therefore, to become the immaculate Son of Heaven -the great Emperor 
- protecting and spreading the holy Dharma and governing all Tibet 
here and now; or vow to become a yogi like Milarepa, the king of 
aU yogis, who lives an ascetic life in the snow mountains to the West, 
sustained mainly by the food of Samiidhi, dressed only in a thin 
cotton garment, and keeping his body warm by means of the blissful 

--- PAGE 490 ---
Dumo. He is a yogi who practices the illuminating Mahamudra day 
and night. When he goes from one place to another, he flies. If you 
can renounce the world and practice the Dharma as he does, that 
would be the best of all; but if you cannot do this, you should vow 
to see his face at least once in this life." Saying this, the old man 
shed many tears. 
When the Jetson Gambopa heard the name of Milarepa, he could not 
stop the spontaneous arising of great faith toward him. The emotion 
that struck him was so great that he fell into a faint for half a day. 
When he came to, he shed many tears and made many prostrations 
in the direction of Milarepa's abode. Then he prayed with great sincerity, calling repeatedly, "Oh, Jetson, Jetson, please have pity on mel 
Please take care of mel" He then performed the ritual of the Seven 
Main Oblations as an offering to Milarepa. In a great and incessant 
inspiration, Gambopa gained extraordinary, hitherto unattained, Experiences in his Samadhi. Engrossed as he was with the thought of visiting Milarepa, the night [rapidly] passed. 
The next morning Gambopa called the three paupers in and served 
them with meat and food far exceeding their expectations, making 
them completely satisfied and happy. He then said, "I wish to visit 
the Lama whom you mentioned yesterday. It seems that you know 
a great deal about him. I shall appreciate it very much if you will 
guide me to his place. I have sixteen ounces of gold and will give 
you half for studying the Dharma." 
The two younger men replied, 'We know very little about this 
Lama," but the older one said, "All right, I will guide you to him." 
That evening Gambopa made offerings and said prayers to the 
Three Precious Ones. That night he blew a long, huge brass trumpet, 
the mighty voice of which reached to every corner of the earth. Even 
today, there is no trumpet anywhere in all Tibet, [in Weu and Tsang]T 
with a greater or more far-reaching sound. 
Cambopa then hung a drum in the air and beat a rhythm upon 
it, producing a solemn, pleasant, and overwhelming boom heard by 
numerous men and animals. On the same night, he had a vision: A 
girl, looking like a native of Mon, came to him and said, "You beat 
a drum for human beings, but many animals have [also] been blessed 
by the sound." She then handed him a skull-cup full of milk, saying, 
"Having blessed even the animals to such an extent, please drink this 
cup of milk. [Before long] not only all the animals here, but all living beings in the Six Lokas will come to you. I am now going to 
the West." She then disappeared. 
Afterwards, Gambopa made this comment: "The human beings 
who heard the sound of my drum that night are those men of lesser 

--- PAGE 491 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
capacity who must go through the successive stages of the Path in a 
gradual manner. Great, indeed, are the bounties given to us by the 
[Ghadamba] Lamas.8 The animals who heard my drum are my great 
yogi disciples who pracice meditation in caves. This vision also indicated that I shall go to my Guru Milarepa and rely solely on his 
instructions in the Skillful Path and Mahamudra." 
Gambopa and the old man then set out to find Milarepa. In the 
course of the journey Gambopa now murmured, now spoke, and now 
cried aloud, "Oh, when can I see my Guru?" His yearning to see the 
Jetsun was so great that tears never left his eyes, and the thought 
of obtaining rest and comfort never entered his mind. 
When they arrived at New Place, in Upper Nyang, the old man 
fell sick. He said to Gambopa, "I do not know much about the way 
from here on. There is, however, a monastery called Sajya [nearby]; 
you can inquire there." He then left Gambopa to go on alone. 
Gambopa walked on like a blind beggar wandering in no-man's 
land. When night fell, he covered his face with his hands, bent down 
to the ground, and wept bitterly. [Suddenly] the old man [appeared 
again] and said, "Do not weep so bitterly! I will show you the way." 
Later [Gambopa] realized that all three paupers were Milarepa's 
transformations. 
Gambopa continued his journey, asking for directions along the way. 
When he reached Dronso Charwa, he met a number of tradesmen 
from the highlands and asked them about Milarepa. A merchant from 
Nya Non called Dawazungpo said, "The master of Yoga, the great 
Milarepa, the accomplished Guru whose fame is known all over Tibet, 
is now residing at Chu Bar of Orin." Hearing this, Gambopa became so excited that he thought the merchant was Milarepa Himself. In wild confusion he hugged the man and burst into tears. 
With the newly acquired information, Gambopa now went towards 
Din Ri. When he -reached the center of a big plain he became exhausted, and sat down to rest on a rock. But due to extreme hunger 
and fatigue his entire Prai:la-system had become so unbalanced and 
disordered that he fell from the rock and fainted, lying unconscious 
for half a day. When he came to, there was not ·even a single hair 
of his entire body from his head down to his feet, which did not 
feel painful. He was desperately thirsty, but there was no one to 
bring him water. He remained there without food and water for 
two days and nights. Then he made this vow: "If I cannot see the 
Jetsun in this life, I swear that in the next life I will be born near 
him, and that my mind will be united and become one with his. In 
the Three Bardos after my death I will look only to him as my sole 

--- PAGE 492 ---
refuge." With the greatest sincerity, and in tears, he made this vow. 
Before long, a Ghadamba monk from Sha Yul came by, and asked 
Gambopa, "Where are you going?" 
"I am going to Drin to visit Jetsun Milarepa." 
"I too am going in that direction. But aren't you very sick?" 
"Yes, indeed, and I am also very thirsty. Could you give me a 
drink of water?" The monk gave him a bowl of water and after 
drinking it Gambopa was completely refreshed. Then, accompanied 
by the monk, he resumed his journey. 
Meanwhile, the Jetsun, in a very happy mood, was preaching the 
Dharma at Fortune Hill. During the discourse, he would sometimes 
remain silent for a time and then laugh heartily. A very well-gifted 
lady patron from Drin, called Tsese, asked him, "Why, dear Jetsun, 
do you now laugh heartily and now remain silent? Do you laugh because you see the progress made by some well-gifted disciple, and sit 
in silence when you see the wrong thoughts of an incapable one?" 
"I am thinking of neither the demerits of the bad disciples, nor of 
the merits of the good ones," replied Milarepa. 
"Why, then, did you smile and laugh today?" 
"This is because my son, the Monk from Weu, has now arrived at 
Din Ri. He fell fainting and in pain beside a rock. With tears pouring down his face and in great faith and earnestness, he called to me 
for help. Feeling pity for him, I blessed him in Samadhi; then I 
became very joyful and burst into laughter." As he said this, his eyes 
filled with tears. 
Tsese asked again, "When will he arrive?" 
"He will get here sometime between tomorrow and the day after." 
"Do we have the Karma of seeing this man?" 
"Yes. Whoever has the opportunity of preparing his seat upon his 
arrival will be sustained by the nourishment of Samadhi. Whoever 
has the opportunity of first seeing him will be guided to the happy 
Pure Land of Liberation." 
When Gambopa and the Ghadamba Lama arrived at the center of 
the marketplace they saw a woman weaving. "Do you know where 
the great Yogi Milarepa lives?'' asked Gambopa. "Where do you come 
from?", she asked. 
"From the great sun-like province of Weu, to visit the Jetsun Milarepa." 
"In that case please come to my house- I would like to offer you 
some food." 
Tea, cakes, and other refreshments were served them. Then the lady 
patron said, "The Jetsun knew, yesterday morning, that you were 
coming. He also made a prophecy about your future. Knowing that 

--- PAGE 493 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
you were tired and sick in Din Ri, he blessed you in Samadhi. I obtained permission from him to welcome you first." 
Gambopa thought, "It was the grace of the Jetsun that saved my 
life. Judging from his predictions about me, I must be a well-gifted 
person." Thinking thus, Gambopa became a little proud of himself. 
Knowing of this self-conceit, Milarepa refused to see him for a fortnight in order to subdue his pride. During this time Gambopa was 
told to live alone in a rocky cave, and Sevan Dunba provided him 
with fuel and utensils for cooking. 
[A fortnight having passed], the lady patron brought Gambopa to 
see the Jetsun. With his power of working miracles, Milarepa transformed both Rechungpa and Shiwa Aui into the appearance of his 
own form. As a result, Gambopa was unable to identify the real Jetsun. Then Rechungpa pointed to the central figure and said, "This 
is the real Jetsun." 
Whereupon Gambopa, the Precious One, offered Milarepa sixteen 
ounces of gold as a Ma~c;lala, together with a brick of tea, introduced 
himself, and related the story of his journey from Weu. Then he 
earnestly besought the Jetsun to recount his life story. 
Milarepa looked straight ahead for a while, solemnly, and with his 
eyes fixed picked up a piece of gold from the Ma~c;lala, tossed it 
into the sky, and said, "I offer this to Marpa Lho Draugwa." As he 
said this, heavenly music and light appeared [all around them], in 
magnificence beyond description. Milarepa took a full skull-cup of wine 
and drank half of it. Then he handed the remainder to Gambopa, 
and said, "Drink it up!" 
Gambopa hesitated, thinking, "This is against the priestly rule, particularly in front of so many people." 
"Do not think so much, drink it!" said Milarepa. 
Being afraid of spoiling the good omen, Gambopa at once drained 
the skull-cup, proving [by this behavior] that he was a good vessel, 
capable of receiving the Pith-Instructions, and would become the holder of the Lineage. 
"What is your name?" asked Milarepa. 
"My name is Sudnam Rinchin [the Precious Meritorious One]." 
The Jetsun then repeated thrice: "His merits were gained by accumulating a store of Virtues; he is truly Precious to all sentient 
beings!" 
Milarepa thought to himself, "Whoever hears the name of this son 
of mine will be liberated from Sarpsara, but I had better not speak 
of it now." [After a while] he said to Gambopa, "It is very wonderful that you have faith in me and come here to see me. I do not 

--- PAGE 494 ---
need your gold or tea. As to my life story, I shall sing you a song." 
Then, accompanied by Rechungpa and Shiwa Aui, Milarepa sang: 
In the sky of Dharmakaya, beyond playwords, 
Gathering the clouds of ever-flowing Compassion, 
I bow down at the feet of gracious Marpa, 
The shelter and refuge of all beings! 
On my right sits my son Rechungpa, 
On my left, sits Shiwa Aui; 
Both join me in chorus, singing 
A song for you, dear Physician! 
In the holy land of India, 
Though many teachers boasted much, 
The two most famous Gurus were 
The great Naropa and Medripa [Maitrpa], 
Who like sun and moon lit up the world .. 
Their heart-son was Marpa, the Translator, 
Who mastered Buddha's teachings, 
Was the host to all MaQQalas, and 
Attracted well-endowed disciples. 
Hearing of the great Master, praised 
By all Oakinis, I yearned to see him. 
I sought him with ·all my strength. 
On seeing him I swooned in ecstasy, 
Bowed at his feet, and sought profound Instruction 
That in this life would lead to Buddhahood. 
My father Buddha said, 
"By the mercy of Niiropa 
I have this knife-like teaching, 
Sharp enough to cut Sarpsara's chain." 
Exerting my body, mouth, and mind, 
A pauper, I worked hard to please him. 
Looking at my fervor and devotion 
With omniscient eyes, he said kindly: 
"The Instructions of the Four Series9 
Are not perfect today; 
Some are deficient, some are overdue. 
Though one may risk a headache 
Imparting them to one's disciples, 

--- PAGE 495 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
Little profit can they bring. 
In days of defilement such as these 
People have little time for leisure, 
While their: activities are great. 
Waste not your time in studies, 
But practice the Essential Teachings." 
To repay the bounty of my Guru 
And conquer the fear of death, 
I meditated hard and resolutely, 
Converting into blessings my wrong thoughts. 
Realizing what the Three Kle5as are, 
I saw the Trikaya Omnipresent. 
To my capable disciples will I transmit 
The inner Experience and blessings; to you 
Will I impart the profoundest Pith-Instructions; 
With their practice, you will spread the Buddhist 
faith. 
Bear this in mind, my dear Physician; 
You soon will reach the State-of-Relaxation. 
This in brief is my life story; 
The details can wait until some other time. 
I, the old man, do not want your gold, 
I have no stove on which to brew your tea. 
If you want the doctrine of the Whispered Lineage, 
Follow my way and practice as I do. 
Venerable Sir, in answer, 
I have sung this song. 
Milarepa then· commented, "This is my reception of our revered 
Physician Priest." Then Gambopa brewed the tea and brought it to 
the Jetsun, saying, "Please accept this offering, this symbol of my veneration for you." 
Milarepa accepted it with delight. He said to Rechungpa, "We should 
offer this monk some tea in return. Now go and collect a little from 
every Repa here." Accordingly Rechungpa [did so, and] prepared the 
tea. Milarepa continued, "Now we need some seasoning." Saying this, 
he made water into the pot, making the tea extraordinarily delicious. 
The Ghadamba Lama then asked the Jetsun to bless him, and, 
for the sake of establishing a Dharmic relationship, to give him some 
instruction. 
· 

--- PAGE 496 ---
The Jetsun asked. "What do you have to offer me in return for 
receiving my blessing?" 
The Lama replied, "I having nothing to offer." 
"It is shameful to say that you have nothing to offer when I see 
that you have plenty of gold with you. After all, what is the use of 
blessing the faithless or giving the Pith-Instructions to the irresolute? 
I think it might be better for you to resume your business trip to 
Nepal without interruption." 
"One cannot deceive the Jetsun," theught Gambopa, "One must 
be careful about what one thinks in front of him." Henceforth Gambopa was convinced that the Jetsun was identical with the perfect 
Buddha. 
"Have you received any initiations before?" Milarepa asked Gam-· 
bopa. ;'Yes," he replied, and then described in detail the initiations 
and instructions he had been given by his other Gurus, together with 
his Experiences and attainment of Samadhi. 
The Jetsun laughed, saying, "One cannot extract oil from sand, for 
it is produced from seeds. First practice my Heat Yoga to see the 
Mind-Essence. By this I do not mean that your previous initiations 
are not good enough, I merely want to stress the importance of a correct Karmic relationship, and the absolute need for you to receive the 
blessing from my Lineage." 
Thereupon Milarepa blessed Gambopa and initiated him into the 
Pagmo practice of the Whispered Lineage, in the Mat:tc;lala painted 
in cinnabar, and then he was given the Pith-Instructions. After practicing them for some time, Gambopa gained good Experiences. He 
compared Milarepa's teachings with those he had received before 
from other Gurus, and as a result many doubts arose in his mind. In 
order to uproot them, Gambopa went to Milarepa for the essentials 
of the View, Practice, and Action. Then, having cleared up all Gambopa's doubts, Milarepa sang a song relating the teaching of Tantra 
in accordance with the Ghagyuba traditions: 
My dear Physician Priest, 
The Ultimate View is to observe one's mind 
Steadfastly and with determination. 
If one searches for the View outside one's mind, 
'Tis like a [blind] monster 
Seeking in vain for gold. 
My dear PhysiCian Priest, 
The Ultimate Practice is not to consider 
Distractions and drowsiness as faults. 

--- PAGE 497 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
Doing so to stave them off is like 
Kindling a lamp in bright daylight. 
My dear Physician Priest, 
The Ultimate Action is to cease 
taking and abandoning. 
To take and to abandon is to be 
Like a bee trapped in a net. 
My dear Physician Priest, 
The Ultimate Discipline is to rest 
At ease in the View. 
If one seeks the Discipline-Without-Rules 
Outside [of one's own mind), it is like 
Lifting the flood-gates of a dam. 
My dear Physician Priest, 
The Ultimate Accomplishment is the full conviction 
of one's mind. 
If one seeks elsewhere the Accomplishment of 
Non-being, 
It is like a turtle trying 
To leap into the sky. 
My dear Physician Priest, 
The Ultimate Guru is one's mind. 
If one seeks elsewhere a Guru, 
It is like trying [in vain] 
To get rid of one's own mind. 
In short, my good Physician Priest, 
You should know that all forms 
Are nothing but the mind! 
Gambopa thought, "What the Jetsun has just said is very true," so 
with great diligence he persisted in his meditation. The first night he 
practiced naked in a cave, but warmness and ecstasy arose within him 
spontaneously. Before dawn he fell asleep, but his body still remained 
upright, as firmly as a rock. 
He continued to meditate thus for seven successive days, the heat 
and blissfulness arising effortlessly. Then he saw the Five Buddhas in 
the Five Directions. In commenting on this Milarepa said, "This experience is like a man pressing his eyes and seeing two moons in front 

--- PAGE 498 ---
of him. What you have experienced is only due to your having controlled the five Pral)as. It is neither good nor bad." 
Although the Jetsun had told him that this experience was of no [significance or] merit, Gambopa was full of enthusiasm, and in a delighted mood continued the meditation for another three months. Then 
one morning at daybreak, he was [suddenly] overcome by a feeling 
that all the vast Three Thousand Great Millenary Worlds in the Universe were spinning round like a turning wheel. He vomited many 
times, and fell to the ground in a faint which lasted for a long time. 
He reported this to the Jetsun, who commented, "This was because 
the Tig Le (Bindu] in the Great Bliss Cakra [of your Head Center] 
is increasing. It is neither good nor bad. Just continue wtih your 
meditation." 
Again, one evening, Gambopa saw the Black Spot HelJ.1° Because 
of this vision, his upper chest11 became congested, and a strong current of Hcart-Pral)a arose [and stirred his entire body). He reported 
this to the Jetsun, who said, "This was because your meditation-belt12 
is too short and binds the Nac;lis too tightly, so loosen it. This experience was caused by a constriction of the upgoing Pral)as. It is neither 
good nor bad. Keep on with your meditation." 
One day Gambopa saw clearly the Deva-of-Desire18 and all the other 
Devas of the Six Lokas; he saw that those in the higher Realms 
rained down nectar to feed those in the lower Realms, satisfying them 
all- (but Gambopa himself) was unable to drink the nectar-rain, and 
died under the blade of a knife (?]. Asking Milarepa about this vision, 
he was told, "The raining-down of the nectar was due to the Tig Le 
[Bindu] increasing in the Right and Left Channels [Roma and Jhunma] at the Throat Center. Your inability to drink the nectar was because your Central Channel has not yet opened. You should practice 
certain vigorous bodily exercises." Saying which, the Jetsun taught Gambopa a few forceful exercises [including those of leaping and tumbling]. 
Gambopa practiced for another month, then one day his body began shivering, trembling, and shaking incessantly. He thought, "What 
has happened? Am I possessed by demons?" He informed the Jetsun 
who said, "This was due to the Tig Le increasing in the Dharma 
Cakra at the Heart Center. It is neither good nor bad. You should now 
concentrate on your exercises, and do not stop them." 
From then on, Gambopa needed little food. One day he saw both 
the moon and the sun, covered by the (dragon] Rahu which had 
two thin tails. The Jetsun commented, "This was because the Pral)as 
in Roma (Ic;la) and Jhunma [Pil)gala) are now entering the Central 
Channel [Avadhiiti]; it is neither good nor bad." Then Milarepa re-

--- PAGE 499 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
peated thrice: "He is a mighty vulture, now is the time, now is the 
time." 
Gambopa practiced most industriously for another month, and then 
he saw a red Mm;u;lala of the Hevajra before him. He thought, "Last 
time, the Jetsun said, 'Now is the time, now is th~ time.' That must 
have presaged this Mal)gala of my Patron Buddha." He asked the Jetsun about this vision, who replied, "This is because the Red Tig LeH 
at the Dharma Cakra of the Heart Center, which was coming up 
from below, is now stabilized. It is neither good nor bad. You should 
now meditate in a relaxed and spontaneous manner." 
Gambopa continued practicing for some time longer, and then one 
day he saw a skeleton-like MaQgala of Dem Chog Luyipa.15 "This," the 
Jetsun explained, "was because of the increase of Tig Le in the Transformation Cakra at the Navel Center. It is neither good nor bad." 
Gambopa again practiced diligently for fourteen days, then one night 
he felt that his body had become as vast as the sky. From the top of 
his head down to the tips of his toes, his whole body, including all the 
limbs, was full of sentient beings, most of them drinking milk. Some 
were drawing the milk from the stars, and drinking it. He also heard 
a roaring noise like that of a great storm, but knew not from whence 
it came. At dawn he loosened his meditation-belt, and the noise then 
stopped. Gambopa reported this experience to the Jetsun, who explained, "This was because the Karmic PraQas have driven all the Tig 
Le into the hundreds of thousands of Nagis throughout your entire 
body. Now these Karmic PraQas have become transformed into the 
Wisdom Pral)as." Whereupon Milarepa imparted to him the Superb 
Dumo lnstruction16 and set him to practicing. 
One day the whole valley appeared to Gambopa to be full of smoke, 
so that in the afternoon all became dark to him. Like a blind man, 
he crawled and groped his way to the Jetsun's abode. The Jetsun said, 
"This does not matter at all. Just sit at ease and meditate." Then he 
taught Gambopa the method of clearing the hindrances in the upper 
part of the body; as a result, the smoke dispersed like [darkness at] the 
dawning of day. 
Then one evening Gambopa's whole body appeared to contain neither flesh nor blood, but only bones linked together by numerous Nagis. 
He asked the Jetsun about this experience, who said, "This is because 
you have worked too hard: your PraQa has become too rough, so practice more gently." Thereupon Gambopa practiced the Yoga of the Patron Buddha in the evening, and the Guru Yoga, with many prayers, 
at midnight. Before dawn he practiced with the Life PraQa, and at dawn 
he slept for a short while. 
[After a time] twenty-four signs, which bore no relationship at all to 

--- PAGE 500 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREP A. 
his previous habitual thinking, appeared in his dreams. Upon awakening he thought, "Were these dreams good or bad signs?" He became 
doubtful, and hesitant. Then he thought, "My Guru is actually the 
omiscient Buddha Himself; why don't I ask him?" Thinking thus, he 
immediately arose and went directly to Milarepa, even forgetting to 
put on his robe. 
At that time the Jetsun was sleeping in a cave at Chu Bar with his 
clothes bundled up for a pillow. Gambopa bowed down before him 
and said, "Dear Jetsun, I have a very important matter to report to 
you. Please do not sleep! Please get up!" 
"It came to me this morning that some distracting thoughts had arisen 
in your mind," said Milarepa. "Now tell me, what disturbs you so?" 
Gambopa replied, "Oh my precious Guru! I had certain dreams last 
night. I wonder whether they are good or bad omens. Please interpret them for me." Whereupon he sang: 
Oh wondrous Jetsun Yogi, 
The Cotton-clad, practicing ascetic deeds! 
To all beings you, the famous Mila, 
Are the glory, veneration, and adornment. 
The first time I heard your name 
I was filled with joy and inspiration. 
With great earnestness, and disregarding 
Hardships, I set out to seek you -
As did the Ever-Crying Bodhisattva.U 
Throughout my rugged journey 
I cried with yearning heart: 
"When can I see my Jetsun Guru?" 
'Twas like the Ever-Crying One. 
When I reached a place from here 
One-and-a-half days' journey, 
I came close to death - lying 
In the road like a discarded stone. 
Due to my unyielding will 
And indomitable faith, 
I was able to complete my journey 
To meet you, my Father Jetsun, 
In this wondrous place, Auspicious Hill. 
[This experience reminds me of] 

--- PAGE 501 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
The Story of Meeting the Holy Chupoa18 
At the Fragrant Palace in the East. 
When I saw you, my hair rose in delight. 
Beyond description was my joy 
As my longing was fulfilled at seeing you. 
Little have I to offer you; 
I am disgusted with Sarpsara, 
Frightened by the toil of life and death, 
And abhor all worldly things. 
From the bottom of my heart 
This echo sounds: 
"Go to practice! Go to meditate." 
Pray, my Jetsun Guru, always remember me 
And embrace me with your compassion! 
Please listen to your servant, 
Who has something to report this morning. 
Last night I recited the Yidham's Mantra, 
At midnight I prayed to you, my Jetsun Guru, 
Then I practiced the Life Pral)a. 
Before dawn I fell asleep 
And had these wondrous dreams, 
Apparently not caused by my habitual thoughts. 
I dreamt I wore a hat with silken brim 
Beautified by fur along its edge; 
Above it was the image of an eagle. 
I dreamt I wore a pair of greenish boots 
Well cut, embossed with brass 
And fastened by silver buckles. 
I dreamt I wore a white silk robe, 
Red-spotted and adorned 
With pearls and golden threads. 
I dreamt of a belt around my waist 
Made of cloth from Mon 
And embroidered with fine flowers, 
Silk tassels, and [many] pearls. 

--- PAGE 502 ---
I dreamt of wearing round my neck 
A white, uncut felt scarf 
With jasmines made of silver. 
I dreamt I held a Tsandar staff, 
With seven precious stones adorned 
And golden lattice-work design. 
I dreamt that in my left hand lay 
A skull brimful of golden nectar. 
Then said I: "Let me use 
This as my drinking bowL" 
I dreamt of a many-colored sack 
Filled with two loads of rice. 
Then said I: "Let me use 
This for my Dharma food." 
And then I shouldered it. 
I dreamt of a wild beast's pelt, 
With head and claws attached. 
Then said I: "Let me use it 
As the cushion for my seat." 
And then I shouldered it. 
Looking to my right I saw 
A fertile mead of golden flowers, 
Where many sheep and cattle grazed. 
I watched them closely like a shepherd. 
Looking to my left I saw 
A jade-green meadow full 
Of many kinds of flowers, 
Where many women bowed to me. 
In the center of the meadow on a mound 
Of golden flowers, a Bodhisattva sat 
Crosslegged upon a Lotus Seat, 
Golden and many-hued. 
I dreamt that before the Bodhisattva 
A fountain played, and from his back 
A brilliant aura radiated 

--- PAGE 503 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
Surrounding him with blazing fire, 
While sun and moon were shining from his heart. 
These were the wondrous things of which I dreamt. 
I know not if as omens they were good or bad. 
Oh great Yogi, who sees the past, the present, 
And the future, pray interpret them clearly for me. 
The Jetsun replied, "Dear Physician-monk, my son, do not feel uneasy, but relax and set your mind at rest. Do not let distracted thoughts 
mislead you into the trap of ego-clinging. Let the knots of skepticism 
untie themselves, cut the string of dual clinging at its most subtle 
length, and pierce through the most delicate and subtle 'frame' of 
habitual thinking. Do not bestir yourself and think too much, but, 
putting your mind at ease in a state of naturalness, make no effort 
whatsoever. I am a yogi who has fully mastered this illusory body. With 
a full knowledge and direct realization of the very essence of all dreams 
as such, I can, of course, interpret as well as transform them. Today I, 
your old father, will explain their meanings to you. Now give me your 
full attention, and listen carefully to my song": 
This, my dear Physician, 
Is my answer. Hearken 
Carefully to what I say! 
My son, you have learned the teaching 
Of Dem Chog in the tradition of Zung Ghar; 
Also the teaching of Ghadamba, in Upper Weu. 
You have mastered and stabilized 
The good Samadhi. I have always thought 
That you were wondrous and outstanding. 
But now, in your great enthusiasm, 
By your dreams you have been caught. 
Is this due to lack of understanding, 
Or merely a pretense? Have you 
Not read Siitras and many Tantras? 
Dreams are unreal and deceptive, as was taught 
By Buddha Himself, in the Final Truth of Paramita. 
To collect, supply, and study them 
Will bring little profit. 
So Buddha used dream as one of the Eight Parables 
To show the illusory nature of all beings. 

--- PAGE 504 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA. 
Surely you remember these injunctions? 
And yet, your dreams were marvelous -
Wondrous omens foretelling things to come. 
I, the Yogi, have mastered the art of dreams, 
And will explain their magic to you. 
The white hat on your head indicates 
That your View will go beyond the "high" and "low." 
The fair trimming on the brim is a sign 
That you will demonstrate the Dharma 
Essence, subtle yet profound. 
The lovely colors of the fur imply 
That you will explain the various teachings 
Of the Schools without mixing them. 
The flying eagle on the top means that you 
Will gain Mahamudra, the foremost ViewAnd will see the Essence of the Unborn. 
The Mongol boots that you dreamt of wearing 
Portray your climbing from the lower to the higher 
Vehicles. 
Their green color and adorning bosses 
Mean that you will attain Buddha's Four Bodies. 
The "pair" shows increase of the Two Provisions. 
The silver ring-strap on the boots 
Is the absence of wrong practices; 
Also it foretells that you 
Will be like a son of BuddhaHumble and self-restraining, 
The exemplar of all Buddhist acts. 
The silk robe you dreamt of wearing 
Indicates that you will not be sullied 
By any vice. The threads of gold 
Symbolize a worthy and stable 
Mind. The red spots foretell 
Compassion and altruism. 
The decorated belt you dreamt of wearing 
Means that you will "fasteri" the Three Realms.19 
The jewels, white flowers, and silk ornaments 
Show your adornment by Three Learnings20 
And guidance over virtuous disciples. 

--- PAGE 505 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
The Tsandar staff you dreamt of holding 
Proves that you have a perfect Guru; 
The seven jewels on the staff 
Symbolize the greatness of His merits. 
Tht: finery of golden lattice work 
Foretells that you will nurture your disciples 
With the Pith-Instructions of the Whispered-Lineage. 
Holding the staff in your right hand 
And striding forward with delight 
Proves that you will dwell in the Pure Land. 
The magnificent Vajra skull you dreamt of holding 
Shows that you will illustrate the truth of Voidness. 
The nectar, filling full the skull, 
Means your enjoyment of great blissfulness. 
The nectar's brilliant, golden light 
Indicates you will brighten forms. 
The thought of the skull as your drinking bowl 
Signifies the merging of the three previous delights. 
Holding the skull in your left hand shows that 
The inner Experience will never leave you. 
The varicolored bag of which you dreamt 
Proves that you will bring all forms 
into the Path. 
The two loads borne upon your shoulder 
Foretell your march along the Mahayana Path 
Through the practice of Wisdom and of Skill. 
The rice therein -the thought 
Of using it for sustenanceMeans that you will enjoy good health, 
Long life, and Samadhi's food. 
Your dream of the pelt on your left shoulder 
Proves mindfulness, immune from wandering thoughts. 
The head and four claws symbolize 
Your ever-increasing Bodhi-Mind 
And the Four Good Thoughts21 with which 
You will relieve the people's pain. 
The thought of using the skin for cushion 
Means you will realize the solidarity 
Of Void-Compassion in your mind. 

--- PAGE 506 ---
Your dream of golden flowers on your right 
Shows the growth of your outer and inner merits. 
The sheep and cattle grazing in the fields 
Symbolize that refuge in the Dharma 
Will fulfill the wishes of all beings. 
The thought of herding them implies 
That you will always be compassionate 
To helpless and suffering men. 
Your dream of a jade-green meadow on your left 
Indicates that you will know Bliss-Wisdom 
Through constant practice of Transcendental Samadhi.22 
The blooming flowers of many kinds show how 
The various experiences of different stages 
\Viii grow step by step within you. 
Many women bowing down before you 
Presage that you will master all Dakinis 
Residing in all the Nac;lis [Channels] and Tig Les. 
The mound of golden flowers in the center 
Indicates that with Realization, Samadhi, 
And immaculate observation of the discipline, 
You will attract around you many monks 
Like clouds that gather in the sky. 
The luxuriant golden leaves 
Upon the lotus seat imply 
That your mind will n'er be sullied by Salllsara, 
Keeping like a lotus its head above the mud. 
The Bodhisattva in the Lotus Posture 
Signifies that you, the young Bodhisattva, 
Will abide not in Nirval)a, 
But with great compassion 
Will transform your body into many forms to help 
The mother-like sentient beings in Salllsara. 
The fountain playing before you shows 
That your fountain of Dharma will ever spout. 
The aura radiating from behind you 
Means that your virtues will purify Tibet. 
The fire blazing from your body symbolizes 
That the warm and blissful wisdom of Dumo-heat 
Will melt the ice of wandering thoughts. 

--- PAGE 507 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
The sun and moon shining from your heart 
Presage your e'er remaining in 
· 
The never-coming, never-going Realm of Great Light. 
My dear son, your dream 
Was very good, not bad. 
To prophesy by judging signs correctly 
Is a virtue allowed by the Dharma; 
But 'tis harmful to be attached 
And fond of dream interpretation, 
Thereby incurring ills and hindrances. 
Knowing that "dreams" are but illusions, 
You can bring them to the Path. 
How can you explain them 
Without thorough knowledge? 
Some evil dreams appear as good -
[But only an expert] sees they presage ill; 
Only a master of the art 
Can recognize good dreams 
When they take on ominous forms. 
Do not, good priest, attach yourself 
To either good or evil signs! 
Bear, dear monk, these words in mind! 
Milarepa continued, "Physician-priest, my dear son, all your dreams 
predicted that the Dharma would grow to full bloom within you. I, 
your old father, with infinite knowledge and confidence, have explained 
to you in detail the symbolic meanings of your dreams. Do not forget 
my predictions, and see if they come to pass. When the time comes, 
and they are verified, a supreme faith toward me, unlike that which 
you have now, will arise in you. You will then realize the effortless 
Mind-Essence in an extraordinary way. Here and now you will gain 
liberation from both life and death. 
Again, my son, if you want to be a devoted yogi you should never 
cling to dreams because, by doing so, you will eventually expose yourself to the influence of devils. If one disobeys the instructions of 
one's Guru, disregards the good advice of others, and clings to selfconceit, one will in the long run lose one's mind. Dear son, you should 
not look at the faults of your friends, nor raise vicious thoughts and 
bestir yourself in many activities. Failure is always a result of the ignorance of others' minds. Furthermore, you should know that this life 

--- PAGE 508 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
is merely a part of the Bardo of Birth-Death; its experiences are unreal 
and illusory, a form of reinforced dreaming. Mental activity in the daytime [creates a latent form of] habitual thought which again transforms itself at night into various delusory visions sensed by the [semi-) 
consciousness. This is called the deceptive and magic-like Bardo of 
Dream. 
"When habitual thoughts become deeply rooted, they drive one into 
good and bad activities, thus creating the Bardo of Samsiira and compelling one to experience pleasures and miseries. To purify this [vicious 
circle of Sa111sara J, one should practice the Dream Yoga and the Illusory-Body Yoga. He who can master these Yogas, can then realize 
the Sambhogakaya in the Bardo State. You should, therefore, practice them diligently until you reach perfection." 
Cambopa then besought the Jetsun for an easy and practical teaching on these different Bardos. In reply, Milarepa sang: 
I bow down to all Jetsun Gurus! 
Especially I take refuge in Him 
Who bestowed upon me many bounties. 
In answer to your request, my son, 
I sing this song of Bardo for you. 
Sentient beings in Sa111sara 
And all Buddhas in Nirvai:Ja 
Are in nature equal, and the same in essence. 
Son, this is the Bardo of View! 
The all-manifesting Red and White [Forces )23 
And Mind-Essence indescribable 
Are but the true non-differentiated state. 
Son, this is the Bardo of Practice! 
The myriad forms of illusion 
And the non-arising Self-mind 
Are one, not two, in the Innate-Born. 
Son, this is the Bardo of Action! 
The dreams that arose last night through habitual 
thoughts, 
And the knowledge of their non-entity this morning, 
In the light of Maya are the same. 
Son, this is the Bardo of Dream! 

--- PAGE 509 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
The five impure Skandhas and the pure 
Buddhas in the Five Directions 
Are one in the Perfecting Yoga -
The state of non-discrimination. 
Son, this is the Bardo of Arising 
And Perfecting Yoga, the Bardo of Path! 
The Father Tantras that come from Skillfulness 
And the Mother Tantras that arise from Wisdom 
Are one in the Third Initiation of the Innate-Born. 
Son, this is the Bardo of Quintessence! 
Self-benefit is reflected in the changeless 
Dharmakiiya, 
Altruistic deeds are done by the ever-manifesting 
Body-of-Form;24 
Yet, in the primordial state, they are but one. 
Son, this is the Bardo of Trikiiya. 
The impure illusory body of the womb-gate 
And the pure form of Buddha's Body 
Are one in the great light of Bardo. 
Son, this is the Bardo of Accomplishment! 
The Jetsun then said to Gambopa, Rechungpa, and Shiwa Aui, "Remember your dreams tonight and report to me tomorrow. I will then 
interpret them for you." 
The next morning Shiwa Aui came [to the Jetsun] first, and said, 
"Jetsun! Last night I had a very good dream. I dreamt that a warm 
sun shone forth in the East, and then it entered into my heart." 
Rechungpa followed, and said, "I dreamt that I arrived at three big 
valleys and shotlted in a loud voice." Then Cambopa came in remorseful tears, saying, "I had a very bad dream." Milarepa replied, "We 
do not know whether it was good or bad; do not come to a conclusion 
about it too hastily. Now tell us about it." 
"I dreamt that I slaughtered many people of different races, and 
stopped their breath. Oh, I must be a sinful person with bad Karmas!" Milarepa said kindly, "My dear son, do not cry so bitterlygive me your hand." Saying this, he held Cambopa's hand and continued: "Son! You will accomplish what you have longed for. Many sentient beings will put their hopes in you for their deliverance from 
Samsara, and their wishes will be fulfilled. My son is born! Now the old 
father has done his share of serving the Dharma!" [Then, turning to the 

--- PAGE 510 ---
others,] he said, "Oh Shiwa Aui, your dream was only a fair one. Because your vow [to serve the Dharma] was not great enough, you cannot benefit many sentient beings. Nevertheless, you will be able to go 
to Buddha's Pure Land. Rechungpa, because you have violated my injunctions three times under evil influence, you will reincarnate thrice 
more, in three different valleys, as Buddhist scholars whose fame will 
be heard afar." 
The Jetsun Gambopa, the Physician from Nyal, then meditated for 
another month with great diligence. At first he saw the Seven Healing 
Buddhas.2r. He needed to take no more than one breath in a whole 
day. After one exhalation the PraQa dissolved itself automatically. One 
afternoon he held his breath and saw the Sambhogakiya Buddha's Pure 
Land, with the infinite View of Wonders. Distracted and amazed by 
these marvelous scenes, he [had to] let out his breath -[and suddenly] he found it was already evening. He thought of telling his Guru, 
but being afraid of disturbing the Jetsun's meditation, he did not go 
to him that evening. In the meditation period at dawn he again held 
his breath, and saw Buddha Sakyamuni appear as the Chief among a 
thousand Buddhas. 
At daybreak he went to the Jetsun and made obeisance to him. 
The Jetsun said, "There is no need for you to tell me your visions. 
I know them already. Now you have seen both the NirmaQakaya and 
the Sambhogakaya of your Patron Buddha. But you still have not seen 
the Dharmakaya. My son, although you would like to stay with me, because of your vows in past [lives], you must now go to Central Tibet. 
So go, and meditate there. The dangers that you have so far met [in 
your meditation] have been countered by me. Hereafter you will face 
another danger, that of miraculous power. [That is to say], when you 
attain these wonder-powers, the Devil of the Son of Heaven will 
come to you; and that is the time you should be extremely cautious, 
[and careful] in keeping these powers most secret. Generally speaking, the Secret Word Doctrine26 [Tantrism] is an esoteric teaching. The Accomplishment is also brought about through secrecy. An 
extremely gifted person with highly developed capacity will not be affected by evil influences. You are one of this kind; therefore no devil 
can ever influence you. For the sake of benefiting all sentient beings 
you should gather disciples and teach them. 
"You can start to teach and spread the Dharma when you behold 
and stablize the realization of Mind-Essence. In time you will see it 
more clearly, which will be quite a different experience from those 
you are having now. Then you will see me as the perfect Buddha 
Himself. This deep and unshakable conviction will grow in you. Then 
you may start to teach. He who can bring his PraQas to the tips of his 

--- PAGE 511 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
fingers can then overcome all the Prana-hindrances. Try and see whether 
you can do so now." 
Gambopa then laid a heap of ashes on a slab of stone. Charging 
his fingers with the Prai)as, he pointed at the heap. When midnight 
came,27 the ashes began to disperse. 
The next morning Gambopa informed the Jetsun of this happening, 
who said, "You have not yet mastered the PraQas, but have only partially controlled them. However, you will soon attain both the Common and Special Miraculous Powers, and perform transformations. As 
now you need no longer stay with me, go to Mount Gambo Dar, in 
the East. There you will find a hill resembling a king sitting on his 
throne, its top looking like an ornamental helmet similar to the one 
I am now wearing; its woods resemble a golden MaQc;lala. In front of 
this hill lie seven others shaped like heaps of jewels; they appear like 
seven ministers prostrated before the king. On the neck of this hill 
you will find your disciples. Go there now and benefit them." \Vhereupon Milarepa sang: 
Oh Venerable Monk, my son! 
Will you go to Central Tibet? 
If so, you may think of delicious meals. 
Whenever such yearning arises, 
Eat the food of divine Samadhi 
And realize that food is but delusion. 
Bring, therefore, all experiences 
To the Realm of Dharmakaya! 
At times you may think of your native land. 
Whenever such yearning arises, 
Realize that your true home 
Is in the Dharma-Essence, 
And know that all countries are delusive. 
Bring, therefore, all experiences 
To the Realm of Dharmakaya! 
At times you may think of gems and money. 
Whenever such yearning arises, 
Consider the Seven Heavenly Jewels 
And realize that gems and wealth are but illusions. 
Bring, therefore, all experiences 
To the Realm of Dharmakaya! 
At times you may think of companionship. 

--- PAGE 512 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MlLAREPA 
Whenever such yearning arises, 
Think of Self-born Wisdom as your consort. 
Remind yourself that all companions 
Are temporal and deceptive. 
Bring, therefore, your experiences 
To the Realm of Dharmakaya! 
At times you will think of your Guru. 
Whenever such yearning arises, 
Visualize Him upon your head 
And for His blessing pray. 
Visualize Him sitting 
In the center of your heart, 
And forget Him never. 
But you should know that even your Guru 
Is delusory and dream-like, 
That all things are unreal and magical. 
The Gambo Dar l\lount in the East 
Is like a king upon his throne, 
The hill behind is like a floating scarf, 
The hill before's a heap of gems, 
Its top a jeweled helmet. 
Surrounding it arc seven small hills 
Bowing like ministers before the king, 
While the woods are like a golden MaQc;lala. 
On the neck of this mountain 
You will find disciples. 
Go there- you will help sentient beings! 
Go there- you will accomplish altruistic deeds! 
Milarepa continued, "I now give you the name of World Glory 
Vajra-IIolder Bhik~u." \Vhereupon he initiated Gambopa, giving him 
all the Instructions, and blessed him. Then the Jetsun bestowed upon 
him a golden Ahrura2R and blessed it with his tongue and saliva. A 
tinder-pouch was also given as a farewell gift. Then Milarepa said, 
"Now you may go to your destination and meditate there." 
Upon Gambopa's departure for Central Tibet [Weu], Milarepa escorted him as far as Shamboche. When they came to a stone bridge 
the Jetsnn said, "Venerable Monk from Weu, as a good omen, let us 
not cross the river [together]. Now put down your load, and let us, 
father and son, talk for a while. Oh Monk from Weu, renounce pride 

--- PAGE 513 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
and egotism, cut the strings of affection and attachment, and abandon 
all worldly desires of this life as a good Buddhist should do. Merge 
all the teachings into one practice. Always pray to me; never associate 
with wicked persons, those whose avarice, hatred, and ignorance are 
great, lest you be contaminated by their shadows of sin. There are 
people who see nothing but others' faults and take all to be their 
enemies. They vilify others, criticize the Dharma, and bring bad influences to all, for in the depths of their hearts the fires of hatred are 
always burning. To give an example, the snake has neither wings, legs, 
nor hands -logically it should be a feeble, meek creature; but as soon 
as one sees it, one is seized by abhorrence. This reflects the great 
hatred existing within the snake. He who cherishes hatred within, 
will see all men as his enemies. Again, some people are very meanthey grasp and store up everything, even if it be a piece of wood or 
a basket of stones. They say, 'When we become old we will need a 
means of livelihood; when we die, we will need food for sacrifice in 
the cemetery.' They say that one cannot practice the Dharma without 
money, that even a Bodhisattva needs money to accumulate his Spiritual Provisions. Then they indulge in usury and all forms of profitseeking. Their blood is always boiling with greed. Again, some people 
will say, 'Now is not the time for us to practice the transcendental 
teachings. He who does not cultivate his compassion, will fall into 
the path of Hinayana. One should never stick to one teaching, otherwise he will be possessed by bigotry and narrow-mindedness.' These 
people are veiled with great ignorance- you should never associate 
with them or pay attention to their babblings. If you talk to them, 
they will ask you who your teacher is and what kind of Dharma you 
practice. But your answers will eventually lead them to anger. Because of their narrow-mindedness, good advice will never do them any 
good, but only incur their vituperation. As a result they will lose their 
refuges and be damned. In other words, one's good advice causes 
other people to sin. This is why you should not associate with men 
who are dominated by the ever-increasing Three Poisonous Desires. 
[The Holy Tantra says]: 
'To stay seven days in a Hinayana temple 
[Brings a Tantric yogi harm, not benefit.] 
Like a tiny, cautious sparrow, watch 
Your conduct with the greatest care!' 
"My son, do not take pride in your continen~e and discipline. Be 
in harmony with all; be patient, persevering, virtuous, and noble; and 
bridle your wandering thoughts. Always talk less and restrain yourself 
from distractions. Constantly dwell in hermitages and spend all your 

--- PAGE 514 ---
time in furthering your Three Learnings. You may have realized that 
your Self-mind is Buddha Himself, yet you should never abandon your 
Guru. You may have known that all deeds are intrinsically pure, yet 
you should never abandon even the smallest virtue. You may have 
realized that all causes and Karmas are void, yet you should abstain 
from committing even the smallest transgression. You may have realized that self and others are one in the Great Equality, yet you 
should not denounce the Dharma and forsake sentient beings. Son, in 
the Year of the Rabbit, the Month of the Horse, and on the fourteenth day of that month, you should come to see me. Now listen to 
my song: 
My son, when the Realm that is beyond 
Playwords in your mind appears, 
Do not let yourself indulge in talk 
Lest you become proud and garrulous, 
Carried away by worldly claims. 
It is important to be humble and modest. 
Do you understand, Venerable Monk from Weu? 
When Self-liberation appears within, 
Engage not in logic and speculation 
Lest meaningless activities involve you. 
Son, rest yourself without wandering thoughts. 
Do you understand, Venerable Monk from Weu? 
When you behold the void nature of Mind, 
Analyze it not as one or many 
Lest you fall into the void-of-annihilation! 
Son, rest at ease in the sphere beyond all words. 
Do you understand, Venerable Monk from Weu? 
\Vhen you practice Mahamudra, 
Practice not virtuous deeds with mouth or body 
Lest your Wisdom of Non-distinction vanish. 
Son, rest at ease in the non-doing state. 
Do you understand, Venerable Monk from Weu? 
When revelations and prophesies are disclosed, 
Be not conceited or overjoyed 
Lest you be deceived by devilish presages. 
Son, rest at ease in the non-clinging state. 
Do you understand, Venerable Monk from Weu? 

--- PAGE 515 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
When you observe your mind with penetration, 
Stir not ardent passion or attachment 
Lest the devil of desire possess you. 
Son, rest at ease and without hope. 
Do you understand, Venerable Monk from Weu? 
Then Milarepa placed his feet upon Gambopa's head and said, 
"Venerable Monk from Weu! I have just imparted to you all the Four 
Initiations. Now be happy and joyful." Thus [in this one act], the 
Jetsun gave Gambopa, [first,l the Initiation of the Divine Body, 
blessing his body to become Buddha's MaQgala; [second,] the Initiation of Divine Speech, blessin~ his words to become Mantras; [third,] 
the Initiation of Dharma, enlightening his mind to the Dharmakaya. 
The very act of putting his feet upon Gambopa's head symbolized that 
Milarepa had given his disciple the Initiation of Vajra-Guru, ordaining him as a full-fledged Teacher of Tantra. Again the Jetsun gave 
Gambopa the Initiation of Expression-Samadhi and said, "I have an 
unusually profound pith-instruction, but it is too precious to give away. 
Now you may go!" 
Milarepa then sent Gambopa on his journey, himself remaining where 
he was. When Gambopa had crossed the river and reached a distance 
from whence he could barely hear the Jetsun's voice, Milarepa called 
him back, saying, "Who else but you would deserve to receive this 
most precious pith-instruction, even though it is of too great a value 
to be given away? Now come here, and I will impart it to you." 
In great joy Gambopa asked, "Should I now offer you a MaQc;lala?" 
"No, it is not necessary to offer me one. I only hope that you will 
cherish this teaching and never waste it. Now look!" Saying this, Milarepa pulled up his robe, exposing his naked body covered with lumps 
of callus. "There is no profounder teaching than this. See what ,hardships I have undergone. The most profound teaching in Buddhism is 
'to practice.' It has simply been due to this persistent effort that I 
have earned the Merits and Accomplishment. You should also exert 
yourself perseveringly in meditation." 
(This unforgettable sight] made an indelible impression upon Gambopa, who, in obedience to his Guru's instruction, began his journey 
to the East. 
As for the account of Gambopa's life-story, and his great achievements in spreading the Dharma and benefiting sentient beings, the 
reader is advised to refer to Gambopa's own Biography in which detailed information may be found. 
Then the Jetsun Milarepa went to Chu Bar, gathered all his disciples together, and said, "This physician-monk will benefit a great 

--- PAGE 516 ---
many sentient beings. Last night I dreamt that an eagle flew from 
here to Weu and alighted on the top of a precious gem. Then many 
geese flocked round it. After a short while, they dispersed in different directions, each goose again gathering about five hundred more 
companions. Thus all the plains and valleys became full of geese. 
This dream indicates that although I am a [lay] yogi, numerous followers in my Lineage will be monks. I am happy beyond words that 
I have now completed my service to the Dharma!" Milarepa spoke 
with deep feeling and great joy. 
This is the story of Milarepa's foremost heart-son- His Holiness, 
Gambopa. 
NOTES 
I In order to predict the future growth of the Ghagyuba, Marpa one day 
told his disciples to remember their dreams that night and report to him the next 
morning. Milarepa dreamt of four huge pillars in the Four Directions, upon which 
four animals performed different acts. Marpa gave this dream a detailed interpreta· 
tion in which he predicted the various accomplishments of his four great disciples 
and the coming of Gambopa. See W. Y. Evans-Wentz' "Tibet's Great Yogi, Mil· 
arepa," 2nd ed., 1951, pp. 149-155. 
2 The Great Compassion Lotus Siitra: T.T.: s:Rin.rJe.Chen.Po.Padma.dKar. 
Pohi.mDo.; Skt.: Mahiikaru~apm:u;larikasiitra. 
3 Tsa Tsa: See Story 45, Note 10. 
4 It is believed that a truly compassionate Bodhisattva is immune from the 
attacks of insects or beasts. Tibetan lamas even use this as a yardstick to judge and 
measure the compassion of their fellow lamas. 
5 The Golden Light Siitra: T.T.: gSer.ljod.Dam.Pahi.mDo; Skt.: Suvan:ta· 
prabhasottamasiitra. 
6 This is a free translation. Literally, " ... ask him to impart to you a recita· 
tion (T.T.: Lun.) of the [Mantra) of the Immovable White (Goddess]." The Im· 
movable White Goddess ~cems to be the Goddess gDugs.dKar. 
7 Weu (T.T.: dWus.): Central Tibet; Tsang (T.T.: gTsan.) Southwestern 
Tibet. 
8 The translator suspects that some printing errors may have crept into the 
text here. It seem~ more appropriate in this instance for Gambopa to remind himself of the bounties he received from the Ghadamba (T.T.: bKah.gDams.Pa.) 
Lamas, though the text reads " ... bKah.sDom.Gyi.bLa.Ma .... , " meaning the 
Lamas who are bound by Injunctions. Ghadamba is an independent School of 
Tibetan Buddhism, founded by Atisha and his disciples, and Gambopa was for· 
merly associated with this School before he met Milarepa. 
9 Lit.: "The Instructions of the Four Directives" (T.T.: bKah.B~bs.bShi.). 
The translator presumes this implies the Four Tantras. 

--- PAGE 517 ---
The Holy Gambopa-Milarepa's Foremost Disciple 
10 Black Spot Hell: T.T.: dMyai.Wa.Thig.Nag. 
11 Upper Chest, literally, the upper portion of the heart (T.T.: sl_l;lin.sTod. 
Du.). 
12 Meditation belt: a soft cloth belt fastened about the yogi's body in order 
to help him keep his posture erect and balanced during meditation. 
13 Deva-of-Desire (T.T.: hDod.IHa.): This refers to the Devas or heavenly 
beings in the Realm of Desire (hDod.Khams.). 
14 Red Tig Le (T.T.: Thig.Le.dMar.Po.): the Essence of the female, or negative, force. 
15 Dem Chog Luyipa (T.T.: bDe.mChog.Lu.Yi.Pa.): a form of the Tantric 
deity Samvara. 
16 The Superb Dumo Instruction (T.T.: mChog.Ge.gTum.Mo.): This seems 
~o be a special instruction imparted only to the most advanced yogis, not included 
m the over-all Dumo practice. 
17 The Ever-Crying Bodhisattva (T.T.: rTag.Du.l_l;lu.): a Bodhisattva who 
longed for the teaching of PrajfHiparamita but could not obtain· it. In his long 
search for the teaching he traveled through many lands and underwent many 
trials. The repeated extraordinary distresses and disappointments that he encountered during his journey made him cry all the time. The full story is related in the 
Mahaprajnaparamitasiitra. 
18 The Holy Chupoa: T.T.: Chu.nPhags. 
19 The Three Realms, or the Three Kingdoms (T.T.: Khams.gSums.), i.e., 
the Realms of Desire, of Form, and of Non-form, which include all realms in the 
cosmos. See Story 5, Note 21. 
20 The Three Learnings: The Learnings of Precepts, of Dhyana, and of 
Wisdom. 
21 The Four Good Thoughts, or the Four Immeasurable Good Wills (T.T.: 
Tsad.Med.bShi.): They are (1) to wish that all sentient beings may gain happiness and cultivate the "seeds" of happiness, (2) to wish that all sentient beings may 
be separated from all sufferings and their causes, (3) to wish that all sentient beings 
may attain pure happiness- that which involves no sufferings of any kind, and 
(4) to wish that all sentient beings may be freed from gain and loss, desire and 
hatred, hope and fear, and may abide in the Realm of Equality. 
22 Transcendental Samadhi, literally, Leakless Samadhi (T.T.: Zag.Med.Tift. 
hDsin.). "Zag.Pa.," though literally signifying "leak," here means desires or Kle~as. 
"Zag.Med.," therefore, means the desire-free, or, transcendental Samadhi. 
23 Red and White (T.T.: dKar.dMar.) here imply the positive and negative 
forces. 
24 Body-of-Form (T.T.: gZugs.sKu.): This implies both the Nirn1a~akaya and 
the Sambhogakaya. 
25 Seven Healing Buddhas: T.T.: sMan.bLa.mChed.bDun. 
26 The Secret Word Doctrine (T.T.: gSuft.s:r'Jags.), or the teaching of Vajrayana. 
27 This is a rather important account of the sign of a yogi's mastery of Pra~a. 
but unfortunately the text does not specifically mention the time when Gambopa 
first started the test. Here the text reads, " ... Nam.Phyed.Tsam.Na.Thal.Wa. 
Bun.Bun.hDug." "Nam.Phyed" usually means midnight; however, in this case it 
could possibly be interpreted as "a half day." Thus, it could mean that it took Gambopa half a day to disperse the ashes. 
28 Ahrura (T.T.: A.Ru.Ra.): a universal medicine which supposedly can cure 
all illnesses, probably myrobalan. See Story 27. 

--- PAGE 518 ---
THE CONVERSION 
OF THE SCHOLAR, LODUN 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W
HEN the Jetsun Milarepa was staying in the Small Tamarisk Forest,1 he was visited by a monk named Lodun Gedun, a follower 
of Rechungpa and Sevan Repa, but formerly an associate of Monk 
Dhar Lho, who once disputed with the Jetsun.2 After making many 
obeisances to Milarepa, he said, "Most precious Jetsun, when I first 
saw you I admired you greatly and I witnessed how my friend [Dhar 
Lho] died; yet, I could not then decide whether the Dharma that we 
practiced was right or wrong. Nevertheless, when I left I greatly respected you. I now come to you for instruction. Pray be kind enough 
to teach me." 
The Jetsun replied, "The Dharma practice of a man who indulges 
in diversions but not in remembering death, will be of little use, because he can neither reduce his wrongdoings nor increase his virtues. 
Now listen to my song": 
Our Lord Buddha preached the Dharma 
To conquer worldly wishes, 
Yet those conceited scholars 
Are slaves to their desires. 
The Buddha instituted priestly rules 
So that the world could be renounced, 
Yet those restrained and "virgin" monks 
With the world are fully occupied. 
Buddha praised the recluse's way of living 
So that worldly ties should be renounced, 
--- PAGE 519 ---
The Conversion of the Scholar, Lodun 
Yet many "hermits" of today 
Are more attached to worldly ties. 
If you forget that death will come, your Dharma 
Practice means little and helps nothing. 
"To my regret, I have always been like that," said Lodun. "From 
now on I shall ever remind myself of the coming of death. Now pray 
give me some instructions to practice." The Jetsun, thinking "I shall 
see whether he can really devote himseU to meditation," replied, "Whoever has little desire for this life, can reach Buddhahood by practicing scholastic Buddhism, although it may take a longer time." He 
sang in elaboration: 
I bow down to all Gurus. 
Listen to me, Venerable Monk! 
The basic Priestly Rules are the 
Great pillars of the Buddhist Hall. 
One should rect them straight, 
Keeping them from leaning. 
Study in logic and the Siitras is 
A precious cleanser of Buddhist teaching, 
Removing the rust of wrong ideas. 
The disciplines of the Three Leamings3 
Are of Buddhism the friends; 
They should not as foes be treated. 
The logic and views of Mahayana 
Conquer the disputes of fools, 
Enlightening those in darkness. 
But Lodun said, "Hitherto I have only practiced verbal Dharma. 
Pray grant me the quintessential Teachings." Thus, with great earnestness, he continued to petition the Jetsun. 
Knowing that Lodun's time for initiation had come, Milarepa at 
first sat quietly and pretended to frown. Whereupon Lodun besought 
Rechungpa, Sevan Repa, and the other disciples to intercede for 
him. Milarepa, very pleased by their sincere petitions, finally gave his 
consent, saying, "The persuasion of two Repas is too strong for me to 
resist. Our venerable monk is also a gifted man capable of genuine 

--- PAGE 520 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MII.AREPA 
practice." [Then, turning to Lodun Gedun, he continued], "Under 
thes~ circumstances, I will give you the instructions, and I sincerely 
hope you will practice them diligently! If one only knows but does 
not practice the Dharma, the results will be like this": Whereupon he 
sang, 
I pay homage to all Gurus! 
Both you, the priest, and you yogis, have pled 
with me. 
The peititioner is our venerable monk, 
A ]earned man, renowned in three valleys. 
He asks fer instructions to enter the Path; 
Of good will are he and his assistants. 
I am the Yogi Milarepa, 
Beloved son of Buddha Marpa. 
I speak not from hearsay, nor with pomp, 
My words are sensible and from the heart, 
They will stand criticism and analysis. 
So with care listen to what this old man says: 
He who practices not the Dharma with devotion, 
Can at most become a sky-going Preta.4 
These sky-going creatures are 
Well-versed in rhetoric and logic. 
Knowing much of Tantra, they possess 
Magic powers and work wonders. 
Living in comfort, they enjoy all pleasures. 
But since they do not truly practice Dharma 
Nor take heed of their minor faults, 
They can never free themselves 
From worldly desires and self-conceit. 
Thus the Compassion-Voidness will ne'er arise 
in them, 
Nor will the buds of pain within them wither. 
In Sarpsara's sea they will forever flounder. 
Much knowledge, sharp intelligence, and mighty magicThese powers are like fire and wood, scorching one's mind. 
One can be sure that unhappiness 
Will result from his own sinful deeds. Practice 
Of the Dharma is the unmistaken way. 

--- PAGE 521 ---
The Conversion of the Scholar, Lodun 
The Death-reviving Drug5 is a life-saver, 
But 'tis useless of not taken. 
If a sick man wants to be cured 
He should take the right medicine. 
The heavenly nectar of long life 
Is at hand for the Asuras. If they fail 
To drink it, they suffer from untimely death. 
What good can the elixir do them? 
To protect yourself from untimely death, pour 
The nectar in your mouth and drink it. 
In Yama's treasury much food 
Is stored of a hundred flavors. 
But many Yamas fail to eat it, 
And from starvation die. 
What does this food benefit them? 
He who would relieve his hunger should 
Put the food in his mouth and eat it. 
With great faith Lodun said, "Each word of yours impresses me 
with deep conviction. Your preaching is indeed most profound. Now 
please be kind enough to instruct me in the essence of the Six Piiramitas." In response, the Jetsun sang: 
I am not well-versed in words, 
Being no scholar-preacher, 
Yet this petitioner is sincere and good. 
The Six Paramitas contain all Buddhist teachings. 
To those who practice Dharma, 
Wealth is but a cause of diversion. 
He who gives his all away, 
Will be born a prince of Heaven. 
Noble is it charity to practice! 
Moral Discipline is a ladder to Liberation 
Which neither monks or laymen can discard. 
All Buddhist followers should practice it. 
Buddhist Patience, by Drang Sung8 exemplified, 
Is the virtue which the Buddha cherished most. 
It is a garment difficult to wear, 

--- PAGE 522 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
Yet all merits grow when it is worn. 
Diligence is the short path to freedom 
And a necessity for Dharma practice. 
Without it nothing can be done. 
Ride then the horse of diligence. 
These four Dharmas bring merit to men, 
Being indispensible for all. 
Now I will speak of Wisdom. 
Meditation is a teaching between these two, 
As it applies to both Wisdom and Merit practice. 
By it all distractions are overcome, 
For all Buddhist practice it is most important. 
Wisdom-Piiramiti.i is the teaching of Final Truth, 
The dearest treasure of all Buddhas. 
Enjoy it then without exhaustion; 
It is the wish-fulfilling gem of Heaven, 
Fulfilling the hopes .of all sentient beings. 
To those who can renounce activities, 
Wisdom-Piiramitii will bring final rest. 
This Provision of Wisdom is most precious; 
By it one will reach perfection step by step. 
This is my reply, Venerable Monk. 
Remember and practice it with joy! 
Having heard this song, many of the disciples gained great progress. 
The Jetsun then said to Rechungpa and Sevan Repa, "Prepare the 
offerings; I am going to initiate our venerable monk." The Initiation 
and Pith-Instructions were thus given to Lodun. 
After meditating for some time, Lodun had many Experiences. One 
day he came to Milarepa while a number of disciples were also assembled there, and said, "[During my meditations) too many wandering thoughts and wild visions came to me. No matter how hard I 
tried, I could not keep my mind quiet and restful. I do not know 
whether this is good or bad; if it is bad, please teach me how to overcome it; if it is good, please show me the way to further it." 
"He has really been practicing hard," thought Milarepa, who then 
remarked, "You may have had many wandering thoughts and wild 
visions, but [in essence] they are all one. It matters not whether they 

--- PAGE 523 ---
The Conversion of the Scholar, Lodun 
arc good or bad. What you should do is to concentrate your effort 
on practicing the View. Now hearken": 
Obeisance to all Gurus! 
Listen to me, Lodun and you others. 
Know you what mind-projection is? 
It creates and manifests all things. 
Those who do not understand, 
Ever wander in Sarpsara. 
To those who realize, all appears as the Dharmakaya. 
They need search no more for another View. 
Know you, Venerable l\lonk, 
How to set your mind at rest? 
The secret lies in letting go -
Making no effort and doing nothing, 
Letting the mind rest in comfort 
Like a child asleep at ease, 
Or like the calm ocean without waves .... 
Rest, then, in Illumination 
Like a bright and brilliant lamp. 
You should rest your mind in peace, 
Corpse-like without pride. 
Rest your mind in steadfastness; 
Like a mountain, do not waver. 
For the Mind-Essence is 
Free from all false assertions. 
Know you, Venerable Monk, 
How all thoughts arise? 
Like dreams without substance, 
Like the vast rimless firmament, 
The moon reflected in water, 
The rainbow of illusion -like all these they arise. 
Never consciously deny them, 
For when the light of Wisdom shines 
They disappear without a trace 
Like darkness in the sun. 
Know you, Venerable Monk, 
How to cope with wavering thoughts? 

--- PAGE 524 ---
Versatile are Hying clouds, 
Yet from the sky they're not apart. 
Mighty are the ocean's waves, 
Yet they are not separate from the sea. 
Heavy and thick are banks of fog, 
Yet from the air they're not apart. 
Frantic runs the mind in voidness, 
Yet from the Void it never separates. 
He who can "weigh" Awareness 
Will understand the teaching 
Of Mind-Riding-on-the-Breath.7 
He who sees wandering 
Thoughts sneaking in like thieves, 
Will understand the instruction 
Of watching these intruding thoughts. 
He who experiences his mind wandering outside, 
Will realize the allegory 
Of the Pigeon and the Boat at Sea.8 
Know you, Venerable Monk, how to act? 
Like a daring lion, a drunken elephant, 
A clear mirror, and an immaculate 
Lotus springing from the mud, thus should you act. 
Know you, Venerable Monk, 
How to achieve the Accomplishments? 
The Dharmakaya is achieved through Non-discrimination, 
The Sambhogakaya through Blissfulness, 
The Nirmanakaya through Illumination, 
The Svabhavikakaya9 through Innateness. 
I am he who has attained all these four Kayas, 
Yet there is no Rux or change in the Dharmadhatu. 
The View, Practice, Experience, 
Remedy, Act, and Accomplishment, 
Are the six essential things 
A yogi faces in his devotion; 
Learn and apply them in your practice! 
Following his Guru's instructions, Lodun continued to meditate with 
great diligence and perseverence. As a result, he gained superb Experiences, which he presented to the Jetsun in this song: 

--- PAGE 525 ---
The Conversion of the Scholar, Lodun 
I pay homage to all Father Gurus! 
Beyond creation and extinction 
Is this illuminating Self-mind! 
Riding on the moving PraQas it runs 
In all directions to all places. 
Since the mighty animation of the mind 
Is in itself beyond all knowing, 
Everything that I desire is found 
In the mind-treasury within. 
Devoid of form and color, 
Excelling the sense realms, 
Is this wondrous mind 
Out-reaching words and phrases. 
By practicing the profound Instruction, 
Heat and bliss spring forth without; 
As a result, deep understanding grows within; 
Then one is forever freed from all adulteration. 
Accomplishment can never be attained 
When off the Path of Skillfulness; 
Wondrous are these instructions 
Of the Whispered Lineage. 
By following this profound Path of Skill, 
Realization have I, the Yogi, gained. 
These wondrous teachings are good indeed to practice! 
Milarepa advised Lodun: "Venerable Monk, do not fasten your 
mind to any 'ground,' do not close it to any contact, do not fall into 
bigotry or extremes. Your mind is something that can never be described, explained, or designated, yet you may call it anything you 
like, when you have fully realized this truth." 
Lodun then continued to meditate in the mountains and gained 
[further] Realization. By study he cleared away all outer doubts, and 
through actual practice he wiped out all inner misconceptions until, a 
yogi monk, he became the snow-lion-like intimate son of Milarepa. 
This is the story of the monk, Lodun. 

--- PAGE 526 ---
NOTES 
1 The Small Tamarisk Forest (T.T.: lJom.Chun.dPal.Cyi.Nags.): literally, the 
Small Tamarisk Meritorious Forest. 
2 See Story 34. 
. 
3 The Three Learnings (T.T.: Slobs.gSum.): The Learnings of Precepts, of 
Meditation, and of Wisdom, arc the three main topics of Buddhist studies. 
4 Sky-going Preta: Here, the word "Preta," (T.T.: Yi.Dags.), does not imply 
the Preta or Hungry Ghost generally known as a denizen of one of the three lower 
miserable Realms. It is used here in a very loose sense to denote certain sky-going 
spirits. 
5 Death·rcviving Drug 
(T.T.: 
<;i.Sos.sMan.Cyi.bDud.rTsi.): 
literally, 
the 
Death-rc::viving Drug Nectar. 
. 6 T.T.: Drait.Srofl.; Skt.: 
r~i: This refers to the story of K~iintn~i who pa· 
tiently endured insult and injury, i.e .. Siikyamuni in a former life suffering mutilation to convert Kaliriija. 
7 The teaching of Mind-Riding-on-the-Breath: According to the central teaching of Tantrism, namely, the theory of the ldenticalness-of-Mind-and-Pra~a (T.T.: 
Rlun.Scms.dvVyer.Mcd.), mind cannot function without relying on, or "riding 
upon" the breath or Priit)as. It is the Prii~a that makes the mind move. See the 
translator's Foreword to "Tibetan Yoga and Secret Doctrines," W. Y. Evans-Wentz, 
Ed., 2nd ed., Oxford University Press, London, 1958. 
8 Flying off from a boat in the sea, a pigeon cannot fly very far before it is 
forced to return to the boat because no landing-place is in sight. This metaphor al· 
ludes to the fact that wandering thoughts, no matter how wild and uncontrollable 
they are, will eventually return to the Mind-Essence, as there is nowhere else to go. 
9 The Svabhavikakiiya, known as the "Fourth Body" of Buddha. Actually it 
is the unification aspect of the Trikiiya. 

--- PAGE 527 ---
SONG OF THE 
EIGHT WONDROUS JOYS 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W
HEN the Jetsun Milarepa was staying at the Red Rock Height of 
Drin, a monk of the Dre Tribe, who had never seen the Jetsun 
before but was greatly impressed by his fame, came in great faith to 
visit him. Reaching Milarepa's abode, he saw only a cooking pot in 
the cave and thought, "There is nothing here -
not a single page of 
Buddhist scripture, not a Buddha-image, not even a small symbol of 
the Dharma, let alone the necessary supplies for amusement and livelihood! [Since there is no holy symbol] such as a Siitra or image of 
Buddha on which he can put his whole reliance,1 I wonder what will 
happen to him when he dies?" 
The Jetsun knew his thought at once and said, "Venerable Monk, 
you need not worry about that. I do have my Holy Scriptures, images, 
and reliance on the Dharma. I shall have no regret, but shall rejoice 
when I die. Now listen to my song": 
I bow down to all Father Gurus! 
My body is the Holy Mai:I<;Iala itself, 
Wherein reside the Buddhas of all Times. 
With their blessings I am freed 
From all needs and attachments. 
By day and night I offer to them; 
Happy am I to do without material things. 
Knowing that all beings in the Six Lokas 
Are latent Buddhas, and all Three Realms 
The Self-creating Beyond-measure Palace, 
--- PAGE 528 ---
Whate'er I do is a play of Dharmadhatu; 
Whoe'er I am with is the Patron Deity; · 
Where'er I stay is the Buddha's abode. 
With my great wisdom I clearly see them all. 
Happy am I to forego outside help and symbols! 
On the "paper" of the Red and White 
Forces I use the "ink" of Wisdom, 
Writing the words of the Five Senses. 
All forms then becomes the Dharmakaya. 
Happy am I without those foolish books. 
All sentient beings in Sarpsara 
Have "Thatness," but realize it not. 
Applying the Profound Instructions, I absorb myself 
In the Samadhi of the Three-in-One Trikaya. 
Oh, whenever death may come 
I shall feel nought but joy! 
The monk thought, "It is indeed correct that he has telepathic 
power; this also proves that the other claims concerning him must be 
true." His faith irrevocably confirmed, he besought Milarepa with 
great earnestness to accept him as a disciple. 
Recognizing that this monk was well-endowed, Milarepa gave him 
the Initiation and verbal instructions, and then sent him to meditate. 
[After a time] he gained excellent experience of blissfulness. One day 
he came to the Jetsun while many disciples were also gathered there 
and said, "In the past I had no experience of joy within, therefore 
my craving for wealth and material things was very great. But you, the 
Jetsun who has no attachments whatever, have a great joy within 
you all the time. From now on I shall follow your way, meditating 
for the rest of my life in a hermitage so that I may always be joyful 
too." 
Milarepa was exceedingly pleased. He replied, "This is very true. 
He who keeps to the hermitage will always be happy and can eventually become a good guide [on the Path of Dharma]." Whereupon 
Milarepa sang of "The Eight Wondrous Joys": 
I bow down to you, the King of Kings, 
The Buddha's wish-fulfilling Nirmat:~akaya, 
The glowing torch that dispels the darkness 
of ignorance, 

--- PAGE 529 ---
Song of the Eight Wondrous Joys 
To you, Translator Marpa, I pay sincerest homage. 
The sky keep of Red Rock Heights 
Is where :Oakinis meet, 
A place of delight that brings 
Much inspiration to me. 
Oh wise and persevering disciples, 
Pay attention to the song 
This old man sings in joy. 
In this quiet hermitage 
Where no sec.taries are found 
Resides a guide ever in Samadhi. 
He knows the Path, a happy man 
Realizing his own body as the Holy Temple. 
Oh, how marvelous it is to know 
That Mind-nature like the sky is pure! 
A firm and steady faith is the guide 
That can lead you from Sarpsara. 
Is there one here who has this guide? 
Oh, happy it is to see that both 
Salllsara and Nirvar:ta are self-liberating; 
Oh, marvelous it is to realize 
That the Four Bodies of Buddha 
Ever exist in one's own mind. 
The [non-clinging) contact with objects 
By the Six Senses, is the guide 
That turns all hindrance into help. 
Is there one here who has this guide? 
Happy it is to reach the shore of No-desire, 
And wondrous to be freed from all duality. 
An upright Guru with a [genuine] Transmission is 
The guide who clears away your doubts and ignorance. 
Is there one here who has this guide? 
Oh, happy it is to be the man 
Who serves his Guru as a Buddha. 
'Tis wondrous to behold the Self-face of the mind! 
This cotton clothing is the guide 
That protects me in snow mountains 
--- PAGE 530 ---
From both cold and heat. 
Is there one here who has this guide? 
Oh, wonderful it is to lie naked in the 
mountain snow, 
Happy it is to fear neither heat nor cold! 
The instruction of Identifying, 
Transforming, and Uniting2 is the guide 
That can crush all fears of Bardo. 
Is there one here who has this guide? 
Oh, marvelous it is to reach the home of Reality, 
Happy it is to be a man with nor life nor death. 
The Skillful Path of the Whispered Lineage 
is the guide 
That can distinguish the pure and the adulterated 
mind. 
Is there one here who has this guide? 
Oh, marvelous it is to feel the Life-PraJ}a 
Coursing through the Central Channell 
Happy it is to have a mind and body 
Always at ease and in Bliss! 
The yogi who practices Voidness and Compassion 
Is the guide who cuts off jargon and playwords. 
Is there one here who has this guide? 
Oh, happy it is to be surrounded by enlightened 
beings 
And marvelous to win disciples through transformations! 
This is the Song of the Eight Joys, 
Sung for you with delight by this old man. 
To clear the minds of my disciples, 
I chant these words with cheer; forget 
Them not, but hold them in your hearts! 
Hearing this song, Dre Dun and the other disciples were all greatly 
cheered and inspired. Drc Dun then said to the Jetson, "All you have 
said is most marvelous. Now please grant me an instruction on the 
View, Practice, Action, and Accomplishment that is easy to understand, to practice, and to 'carry.'" 
In reply Milarepa sang: 

--- PAGE 531 ---
Song of the Eight Wondrous Joys 
I pay homage to all Father Gurus. 
. When you deepen the View through thought profound, 
Be not misled by verbal knowledge. 
Before you have realized Awareness in. itself, 
Chatter not about the View of Voidness! 
All that which manifests 
Is unreal as an echo, 
Yet it never fails to produce 
An effect that corresponds. 
Karmas and virtues therefore 
Should never be neglected. 
Revile not others with 
Your bigotry and egotism, 
Cling not to self-fixed ideas without 
An understanding of the Supreme Truth. 
First, fully realize Self-nature 
And root up all errors from within! 
Before the great Illumination 
Shines forth in your mind, cling not 
To sweet ecstasy and Voidness. 
Though all things are Void-manifesting, 
Never wallow in pleasures, nor expect 
Your troubles to vanish without effort. 
Things in themselves are void, 
So never cling to Voidness 
Lest you stray in formalism. 
When, in the tide of mundane bliss 
One's crude, wandering thoughts subside, 
An ecstasy will then arise. But he 
Who is attached to it, will go astray. 
Before Realization shines forth within, 
Or one can bless all objects and appearances, 
Before all five sense-experiences tum into 
great bliss, 
· Or all delusory thoughts come to an end, 
--- PAGE 532 ---
Engage not in anomalous acts at will, 
Lest you go astray in practicing the Equal Acts.8 
In bringing into being the last Accomplishment, 
One should not seek Buddhahood elsewhere. 
Before the essence of Self-mind is clearly seen 
Beware of falling into hopes and fears. 
Should you disciples think your body to be Buddha's, 
Never deem it to be the real Nirmlit:~akaya. 
Should your wavering thoughts vanish in the Dharmakaya, 
Never think of them as real entities 
Now extinguished into nought. 
The great Merits, Acts, and Pure Lands 
Are natural manifestations of pure Wisdom; 
Never should one regard them 
As real things in the outer world. 
Having heard this song, Dre Dun gained a decisive understanding. 
For a long time he meditated in a hermitage and eventually gained 
superior Experiences and merits. He was then known as Dre Dun Drashi 
Bar, and became one of the intimate sons of the Jetsun among the 
ranks of those senior Repas, such as Dungom Repa. 
This is the story of Dre Dun. 
NOTES 
1 Reliance (T.T.: rTan.): any Dharmic Symbol upon which one puts his 
trust. This can be a Siitra, a Buddha-image, or the relics of a Buddhist saint. 
2 This refers to the teaching of identifying all manifestations as Miya, trans· 
forming all manifestations into pure forms, and uniting all manifestations with 
the Dharmakiiya. If one can do this, he wtll be able to overcome ·all fears in the 
Bardo. 
3 Equal Acts (T.T.: sPyod.Pa.Ro.sRoms.): In the advanced stage, Tantric 
yogis practice many anomalous actions in order to eradicate all their conventional 
thoughts and habits, thus equalizing all their antithetical and dualistic ideas. 

--- PAGE 533 ---
MILAREPA CONVERTS 
THE UNBELIEVERS 
THROUGH MIRACLES 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
O
NE DAY Jetsun Milarepa made up his mind to visit a temple where 
the monks were extremely hostile to him, accusing him of being 
a nihilistic heretic. All his disciples implored him not to go, but he 
paid no heed. As he was approaching the gate of the congregation hall, 
all the monks saw him coming. They rushed at him, beat him savagely, dragged him into the hall, and tied· him to a pillar. But after 
awhile Milarepa appeared again outside the temple! The monks gathered round once more, beating him severely, dragging him into the 
temple again, and smiting and chastising him in every manner possible. But strangely enough, no matter how fiercely they struck him or 
how forcefully they tugged and pulled at him, Milarepa remained 
still as an image, and they could not move him an inch. 
More monks were then called, and every way of shifting him was 
tried, but in vain: Finally they bound his body with ropes- attempting to drag it from before and push it from behind. Yet it stood 
firm like a great, heavy rock. The monks, thoroughly exhausted by all 
this, gave up in bewilderment and frustration. 
Some of them began to implore Milarepa to go away, while qthers 
asked him, "When we detained you inside the temple you suddenly 
appeared outside; when we tried to force you out, you stubbornly 
remained within. How could this happen?" Milarepa replied, "I am a 
nihilistic heretic, so if I am killed, I keep nothing; if I am beaten, 
I suffer nothing. When I was detained in the temple or chased out 
of it, I still retained nothing. Since I have annihilated clinging to 
both Saq:~sara and NirvaQa, I can, of course, do all these things!" 
--- PAGE 534 ---
The elders among the monks then said, "Because of our ignorance 
we failed to recognize you as an accomplished yogi. Please forgive our 
misconduct, and leave us." The Jetsun replied, "I do not know whether or not I am an accomplished yogi. Nor do I know where such a 
yogi may be found, or what he would do now. But you monks should 
not be so proud of yourselves and wrong others to such an extent. 
You should know that to revile and wrong the innocent is even worse 
than to commit the Ten Vices, while to indulge in self-conceit is the 
very sign of ego-clinging and the cause of falling into Sarpsara." 
"We are fully convinced that you are an accomplished being," replied the monks. "Please tell us why you came here today and spoke 
as you did." 
In answer, Milarepa sang: 
Like the transparent, crystal mind of Bardo, 
Nothing can wreck or hinder me, 
Catch me, or release me. 
Striking like a shooting star, 
I, Milarepa, have today worked wonders 
To convert all unbelievers. 
I shall work no more miracles, 
For I am sure that all impieties 
And misconceptions are destroyed. 
Some monks then asked, "This is indeed wonderful, but why do 
you say that you will not work any more miracles?" 
"There are only three occasions when miracles should be performed," 
replied the J etsun, and sang: 
To convert the impious, to better 
Meditation Experiences, and to 
Identify the Three Accomplishments 
Should miracles and wonders be performed. 
At other times they should be concealed. 
This was what my Jetsun Gum decreed. 
A monk said, "With such a [profound] understanding of the Manifestation-Void, one can surely study the Buddhist teachings with ease 
and delight." Milarepa replied, "When I studied these teachings, I 
never held my head high. Well, I may have studied much, but now 
I have forgotten it all! I think it is perfectly right for me to have 
done so. Now listen": 

--- PAGE 535 ---
Milarepa Converts the Unbelievers through Miracles 
Forgetfulness of kinsmen comes 
To him who realizes Equality. 
Fitting is it then for him 
To forget desires and attachment. 
Forgetfulness of this and that will come 
To him who realizes Wisdom beyond thought. 
Fitting is it then for him 
To neglect all pains and joys. 
Forgetfulness of meditation practice comes 
To him who realizes non-thought and non-consciousness. 
Fitting is it then for him 
To disregard all gain and loss. 
Forgetfulness of the Gods of Arising Yoga1 comes 
To him who realizes the self-nature of Trikaya. 
Fitting is it then for him 
To ignore all conceptual teachings. 
Forgetfulness of striving for accomplishment comes 
To him who realizes the Fruit inherited within. 
Fitting is it then for him 
To forget all lesser dharmas.2 
Forgetfulness of all words and talk comes 
To him who practices the instructions of the 
Whispered Lineage. 
Fitting is it then for him 
To forget prideful studies. 
Forgetfulness of black-printed books comes 
of itself 
To him who realizes that all things are holy 
scriptures. 
Fitting is it then for him 
To forget Buddhist books. 
Another monk then said, "Before one reaches Buddhahood, one is 
expected to encounter many hindrances, deviations, and doubts. It is 
not advisable then to forget the [regular] Buddhist teachings!" In reply Milarepa sang: 

--- PAGE 536 ---
He who understands that all confusions 
Are mind-made and is convinced about 
Non-being, will stop making efforts, 
Happily enjoying Truth immutable. 
He who realizes Ultimate Reality, 
Discriminates no more between the dharmas; 
In joy he then experiences 
The overthrow of ignorance! 
When one realizes the truth of Non-extinction, 
Hope and fear will in his mind arise no more; 
In joy he then experiences 
The departure of confusion! 
Through ignorance one wanders in Saq1sara, 
But through the Pith-Instructions of an accomplished 
Guru 
One can be freed from attachment and desires. 
This is the supreme glory of the Sangha! 
Philosophies are made by mind 
And speculative words mean little, 
For of no use are they 
In conquering the passions. 
Try to subdue your self-conceit, 
My dear priests and scholars. 
In Enlightenment one sees that the essence 
Of perceiving and confusing is the same. 
Oh followers of Dharma, 
Abandon not Saq1sara, 
But rest your mind 
Effortless, at ease. 
Then with the vast Void you will 
Identify yourself. 
This is the teaching of all Buddhas! 
Thereupon all the monks were filled with new faith toward Milarepa, and ceased cherishing impious and pernicious thoughts about 
him. 
Among the priests, there was a distinguished monk called Ligor 

--- PAGE 537 ---
Milarepa Converts the Unbelievers through Miracles 
Sharu whom Milarepa accepted as a servant-disciple and initiated with 
the Pith-Instructions. After meditating for some time, Ligor Sharu 
gained good Experiences. Then he thought, "If the Jetsun, with such 
great power and blessing, could adapt himself slightly to people and 
conventions, many more outstanding scholars in W eu and Tsang [Central and Western Tibet] would come to him. As his fame and prestige 
increased he would be able to benefit more people and to serve the 
Dharma on a greater scale." So thinking, he came to Milarepa and 
told him of his ideas. But the Jetsun replied, "I will only act in accordance with my Guru's injunctions; other than that, I will do nothing in this life. Those who take heed of worldly affairs may do what 
they like, but I am not interested in their plans. Now listen": 
I bow down to Marpa, the Translator. 
Realizing that fame is unreal as an echo, 
I abandon not the ascetic way of life, 
Throwing away all cares and preparations. 
Whatever reputation I may have, 
I shall always be happy and contented. 
Realizing that all things are illusion, 
I cast away possessions; 
For wealth obtained by strife 
I have not the least desire! 
Whatever my means and prestige, 
I shall always be happy and contented. 
Realizing that all followers are phantoms, 
I have no concern for human relationship 
And travel where I pleaseUnlike those artificial scholar-priests 
Who act with discretion and restraint. 
V\lhatever the status I may have, 
I shall always be happy and contented. 
Realizing that desires and sufferings 
Are themselves the great Equality, 
I cut the rope of passion and of hatred. 
With or without associates, 
I shall always be happy and contented. 
The nature of being is beyond playwords; 

--- PAGE 538 ---
Attachment to any doctrine or concept 
Is merely a matter of self-confusion. 
Unshackling the fetter of the knower-and-the-known, 
Whatever I become and wherever I remain, 
I shall always be happy and contented. 
In the great Illuminating Mind itself, 
I see no pollution by wandering thoughts. 
Throwing away all reasonings and observations, 
Whatever words I hear or say, 
I shall always be happy and contented. 
Ligor Sharu, the monk-disciple, then said, "Dear Jetsun, for you, 
of course, this is quite enough. But I asked for the sake of benefiting 
inferior sentient beings and propagating the teaching of the Ghagyuba." Milarepa replied, "In the beginning I made a solemn vow to live 
in this way; I have done so up till now, and I will do so in the future. 
I am quite sure that by living thus I can benefit many sentient beings and serve the Dharma well." 
"What vow did you make?" asked the monk. "This," replied Milarepa, "and I hope that you, my disciples, will also make another like 
it." Whereupon he sang: 
Because of my fear of Saq1sara, and the grace of 
my Guru, 
I vowed that I would never pursue things in 
the outer world 
Before I had enjoyed the supreme taste of the 
Holy Dharma. 
I vowed that I would never seek food for myself 
Before I had carried out my Guru's injunctions. 
I vowed that I would ne'er display the Tantric Acts 
Before I had mastered fully the Skillful Path. 
I vowed that I would never shoulder the Ghagyuba Doctrine 
In defiance of Naropa's admonishments. 
I vowed I would never practice Dharma for 
self-benefit; 
This was the oath I took when first I stirred 
the Bodhi-Mind. 

--- PAGE 539 ---
Milarepa Converts the Unbelievers through Miracles 
I vowed that I would never try to spread Marpa's 
teachings 
[In an artificial way], for He would act in 
secret 
To spread the teaching throughout Tibet. 
To please my Guru is to practice and meditate 
right now! 
Other than this, I know of no way to please him! 
Through the blessing of the Jetsun, Ligor Sharu changed his views 
and, following the example of his Guru, also made the same vow. 
With great determination he meditated continuously in the hermitage, 
and as a result, he gained the extraordinary Merits of the Path and 
Bhiimi.3 Eventually he became one of the intimate sons of the Jetsun among the priest-yogi disciples, and was known as Ligor Sharuwa. 
This is the story of Ligor Sharu. 
The foregoing [collection of] stories are those concerning Milarepa and his well-endowed disciples, those who became the Jetsun's 
great intimate sons. 
NOTES 
1 In the practice of Arising Yoga the yogi strives to remember and sustain 
the vision of the Self-Buddha at all times. But since this is done with a conscious effort through the mundane mind, this Yoga practice is not of a transcendental 
nature, being designed· merely as a preparatory practice for higher Yogas. 
2 Lit.: "To forget the mundane dharmas." 
3 Bhiimi (T.T.: Sa.), literally means the earth, but this term is used in most 
Mahiyina scriptures to denote the advanced stages of the Path. Generally ten 
major stages, or Bhiimis, are given. See Story 54, Note 2. 

--- PAGE 541 ---
PART THREE 
MISCELLANEOUS 
STORIES 

--- PAGE 543 ---
VARIOUS SHORT TALES 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W HEN Jetsun Milarepa was living in the solitary place called Ku Ju, 
Rechungpa besought him for a teaching through which he could 
practice his devotion with body, mouth, and mind. In response Milarepa sang: 
To practice devotion with your body 
Is to observe the discipline of Non-distinction; 
To practice devotion with your mouth 
Is to keep it shut like the dumb buffalo; 
To practice devotion with your mind 
Is to see the nature of Non-existence. 
Rechungpa asked again: 
Because of my ignorance, 
I still do not understand 
How to observe the discipline of body, 
How to control my mouth, 
And how observe Mind-Essence. 
The Jetsun replied: 
To observe the discipline of body 
Is to keep the Rules of the Three Learnings,1 
To observe discipline with the mouth 
Is to keep it silent and at ease, 
To behold Mind-Essence is to observe 
It in a way that's free from clinging. 
In expounding his Guru's instruction, Rechungpa sang: 
--- PAGE 544 ---
In the innate-born Dharmakaya, free in itself, 
Is the concept of the Sambhogakaya. 
[Thus] can the Nirmal}akaya serve innumerable beings. 
The Foundation is the spirit of Renunciation, 
The Path is the Bodhi-Mind and Bodhi-Acts, 
The Fruit is the observance of Samaya rules. 
Renounce the Eight Desires of the world, 
Abandon all this life's affairs, 
Forswear pleasures and wealth, abjure 
Dishonesty and evil living. 
Like a madman, pay no attention to your body; 
Like a mute, keep your mouth shut at all times; 
Like a child, free your mind without clinging; 
These are the ways to practice one's devotion. 
The Jetsun then commented, "But he who knows not the vital 
points is liable to err like this": 
He who strives for Liberation with 
The thought of "I" will ne'er attain it. 
He who tries to loosen his mind-knots 
When his spirit is neither great nor free, 
Will but become more tense. 
He who has no Realization 
Wanders in the dark like a blind man. 
He who cannot keep the discipline 
Has no true spirit of renunciation. 
Without a Bodhi-Mind, 
Others one cannot help. 
If there is no Tantra, there 
Will be no Teachings that guide. 
The Eight Dharmas are the temptations of this world. 
Desires and passions cause one to destroy the 
virtues; 
By cunning and clinging, in Saq1sara one is confined. 
If thoughts arise, so does the "dual." Words 
By talking cannot be transcended. 
A teaching without Lineage is broken. Failure 
To observe the discipline brings Yama. 
If you become entangled with relatives 
And foes you fall into confusion. 
With the thought of "being," comes 

--- PAGE 545 ---
Various Short Tales 
The idea of taking and rejecting. 
From the conception of "existence," 
Follows clinging. Without 
Genuine Enlightenment, one's 
Mind is obsessed by wishful-thinking. 
All talking will become sheer nonsense 
If one cannot elucidate the Truth! 
At another time, Jetsun Milarepa covered his head and face while 
sitting on his meditation seat. A junior Repa came to him and asked, 
"Father Jetsun, how is it that you appear to be falling asleep?" In 
answer, Milarepa sang: 
When I cover my head and face 
I can see places far away, 
But worldly beings nothing see 
With their eyes wide open. 
When I sleep with my body naked 
I carry out the Dharma. 
The Eight Worldly Desires 
Are causes of distraction. 
All acts are completed 
Within one's mind. How 
Wonderful is this experience 
Of unceasing ecstasy! 
I, the Yogi who has completed his devotion, 
Ever feel joyful in whate'er I dol 
On another occasion, when Jetsun Milarepa was staying at Tsiba 
Conti Tson, Rechungpa asked him, "If a yogi's power, Experiences, 
and Realization are great enough, must he also make a secret of his 
accomplishments, or may he demonstrate them if he wishes?" In response the Jetsun sang: 
The lion on the snow mountain, 
The tiger in the forest, 
And the whale in the ocean -

--- PAGE 546 ---
THE HUNDRED mOUSAND SONGS OF MJLAREPA 
These are the three leading animals. 
If they could conceal themselves 
It would be wonderful for them, 
For they would then avoid their foes. 
These are my three outer parables. 
Now listen to the inner ones: 
The physical body ofthe yogi, 
The Skillful Path of Tantra, 
And the Accomplishment through Devotion, 
[These are three precious things]. 
If a yogi could conceal them 
It would be wonderful for him, 
For he would then meet fewer foes. 
Alas, few yogis in Tibet 
Can now conceal these things. 
Therefore, few accomplished 
Beings can here be found. 
At another time, Shangon Repa came and told the Jetsun that he 
had many doubts in his mind. The Jetson answered him in detail, and 
sang in conclusion: 
Without realizing the truth of Many-Being-One, 
Even though you meditate on the Great Light, 
You practice but the View-of-Clinging. 
Without realizing the unity of Bliss and Void, 
Even though on the Void you meditate, 
You practice only Nihilism. 
If you cannot meditate 
At any time and anywhere, 
Your non-thought meditation is merely a delusion. 
If you do not realize your plain-mind,2 
Your practice on the Not-two 
Cannot transcend effort and exertion. 
If you do not realize self-mind as non-existent, 
Your practice of Non-distinction 
Cannot transcend strife and effort. 
If a deep renunciation has 
Not yet arisen in your heart, 
Your action less actions are 

--- PAGE 547 ---
Various Short Tales 
Still bound by hopes and fears. 
Virtuous deeds tum into vices if 
You know not [what is) beyond rejection and 
acceptance. 
All you do will enmesh 
You in the toils of Sa111sara 
If you know not (what is) beyond life and 
death. 
Later, a serious drought occurred while the Jetsun Milarepa was 
. staying at the Water Wood Crystal Cave3 beside the River of Benevolence, known as the Neck of the Goddess of Long Life. Because of the 
scarcity of water some patrons of Drin quarreled, and fought one an· 
other over the water-rights. Finally, they all came to the Jetsun for 
arbitration. He said to them, "I know nothing about worldly affairs. 
The rain will come -
you do not have to fight among yourselves." 
Rechungpa, however, still urged the Jetsun to reconcile them, to which 
Milarepa replied, "We yogis have nothing to do with worldly arbitration. Now hearken to my song": 
You are the treasure of perfect virtues, 
A source fulfilling all desires; 
To you, the great Translator Marpa, 
I bow down with deepest reverence. 
The advisor, the mediator, and the go-between -
These three cause discord and pain. 
He who wants to be free and neutral should remain 
Silent like a mute and take no sides. 
Properly, kinsmen, and one's native landThese three imprison one in Saqtsara's realms. 
He who would cross the river of wretchedness 
Should cut relentlessly attachment's chain. 
Self-conceit, trickery, and pretenseThese three drag one down to lower Realms. 
He who would reach a higher plane and the Path 
of Liberation, 
Should keep his mind upright and straightforward. 

--- PAGE 548 ---
Talking, discussion, and scholarship -
These three cause jealousy and pride. 
He who would practice holy Dharma, 
Should humble and modest be. 
The kitchen, [household] work, and caresThese three spoil a yogi's meditation. 
He who would uphold his innate Wisdom, 
Should strengthen his self-respect. 
The Master, the disciple, and the learning -
These three burden and distract the mind. 
He who would meditate in solitude, 
Should avoid them all. 
Sorcery, magic, and To Tse4, these three 
Doom a yogi to evil influence. 
He who would consummate the Dharma practice, 
Should remember the singing bird of Jolmo,5 
I have now sung of the seven 
Demerits against the Dharma 
And their seven antidotes, 
Acquired through my own experience. 
With this merit I hope that soon 
You will attain Buddhahood. 
Then Milarepa prayed to the Precious Ones; whereupon heavy rain 
fell, and all disputes were calmed. The son-disciples and monks there 
assembled then besought a blessing from the Jetsun, asking him to 
vouchsafe them the essential teaching of Mahamudrii and of the Six 
Yogas. He replied, "If you can practice without fail, I will teach you. 
These are extremely important points which you should all bear in 
mind": 
Though, Father Guru, you appear 
To have entered into Nirviit)a, 
In truth you dwell in the Pure Land of the 
Sambhogakaya, 
Doing benevolent deeds for all 
Sentient beings in the Three Realms. 

--- PAGE 549 ---
Various Short Tales 
To you, Translator Marpa, I pay 
Sincerest veneration. 
Dewashun, Shiwa Aui, Ngan Tson Dunba, 
And my well-endowed disciples here assembled 
Who are dear to me as my own sons, 
Have asked me for instructions on meditation. 
In reply I sing of the Ten Essentials. 
It is important to know 
That the rainbow Buddha-Body 
Is void yet manifesting. 
It is important to know 
That devils and ghosts are non-existent; 
Their magic forms are merely 
Conjurations of one's mind. 
It is important at all times to have 
The greatest veneration 
For the gracious Jetsun Guru. 
It is important to know 
That one should renounce 
Endless worldly affairs. 
It is important to work hard without distraction 
For the warm and blissful Experiences 
Of the Prat:ta and Nac;li practices. 
It is important to have a strong will to unite 
The combining practice of Dream Yoga 
And the Yoga of Illusory Body. 
It is important to work on the Beyond-symbol 
meditation 
For the naked, illuminating Essence. 
It is important to note the Cutting-through 
instruction6 
For the All-manifesting Voidness. 
It is important to have pity and kindness 
--- PAGE 550 ---
Toward unenlightened sentient beings. 
It is 'important to have a free-from-fear-and-hope 
conviction 
Of the non-arising Dharmakaya of Self-mind. 
My dear sons, these are 
The important things that you 
Should bear in mind and practice. 
All the disciples were greatly inspired. Rechungpa then besought 
the Jetsun to elaborate on the teaching called "Pointing-out the Wisdom of the Four Blisses." This request was granted, and in conclusion Milarepa sang: 
In a solitary place, like a forest, 
The yogi should practice all Four Actions7 
And balance the Four Inner Elements. 
Thus, the Wisdom of Four Blisses 
Will in his mind appear. 
On another occasion Jctsun Milarepa went to Phuyagzha of Orin 
for alms. A patron said to him, "Near the temple called Lhaze there 
is a very delightful cave. If you would like to live there I will serve 
you, but I do not know whether the local she-devil will be friendly 
to you." Milarepa asked, "\Vhat sort of a cave is it, and who is this 
devil?" The man replied, "The cave is very cozy and delightful but 
the trouble is, that she-devil will just gulp down whoever ~tays there. 
You may, if you think you can, stay in the cave and keep her company." 
Milarepa then went to the cave and remained there. At midnight 
a woman appeared and thundered in a threatening voice, "Who is 
st,aying in my home?'' Milarepa paid no attention, but remained in a 
mood of compassion. The she-devil then cried, "Damnation! It looks 
as if he intends to stay here for good!" So she called a great army 
of demons to throw rocks and hailstones at the Jetsun and conjured 
many fearful visions to frighten him. But they could not even scratch 
his skin because he was in Samadhi. The demons then all cried, "We 
want to have our place and our beds for sleeping. Whatever reason 
may have brought you here, go away now, go back where you belong! If you do not go, we shall call many more armies to come here 

--- PAGE 551 ---
Various Short Tales 
to drink your blood and eat your flesh!" But with great compassion 
the Jetsun sang in reply: 
Listen carefully, you demon army, 
You malignant and vicious Hungry Ghosts, 
Do you know that you are being 
Punished by your own Karma, 
That the greater the malignant thoughts 
The greater the sufferings one undergoes? 
Do you know that fortune 
Will vanish with ill-will, 
That the greater your greed, 
The harder is your food to find? 
You are by pressing hunger 
Deprived of opportunities, 
Through too great love of moving 
You have lost your home and beds. 
Because you try too hard 
You cannot finish what you do. 
Because of your evil Karma 
You can hardly accomplish anything. 
Because you talk too much, 
Your foes you cannot conquer. 
The malicious visions that you conjured 
Are to me most welcome and amusing. 
To your sordid, delusive sorcery 
I, the Yogi, have much to say. 
You should beseech me with compliments 
If you would have back your home and beds. 
If you have any argument to make 
Consult together and present it. 
This is the stumbling place of many yogis; 
I now come here solely to discipline you! 
This is where I and you foregather. 
But I am the one whose wishes are fulfilled. 
You ghosts assembled here, 
Depart not, but remain 
And call your friends to join you! 
The she-devil, leader of the specters, then said to Milarepa, "Because you wear the armor of Void-Compassion, you cannot be harmed 
in any way that we have tried!" Saying this, she and all the demons 

--- PAGE 552 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF Mn.AREPA 
prostrated themselves before the Jetsun, offering him their lives and 
hearts, together with a solemn pledge [to reform]. Milarepa then 
preached the truth of Karma and the law of virtue to them. 
Upon the Jetsun's return, the patron asked him, "Was the shedemon subdued?" Milarepa replied, "Yes indeed; now please listen 
to my song": 
In the Lhaze Temple at Drin 
I sat with this phantom body, 
Crossed-legged, absorbed in Non-dual Dhyana. Without 
Distraction I contemplated on the truth of 
non-being, 
Converting the vicious she-devil to Bodhi. 
Renouncing malice, my disciple she became. 
From now on, whoever meditates 
Will meet no trouble there, 
Whoever stays there will progress. 
That place has become an auspicious Cave of 
Goddesses; 
The hostess there is now a lay-BuddhistOne of my faithful followers, 
A helpful friend to all. 
Whoever stays there is assured 
Of health, long life, and Accomplishment. 
Hearing this song, the patrons were all delighted. With sincere 
faith they served the Jetsun with great hospitality during his half-day 
sojourn there. A faithful shepherd [among them] besought Milarepa 
to give him some Buddhist teachings that would be helpful to his 
mind. Milarepa said, "It is easy for me to preach the Buddhist teachings, but it is difficult to find people who can really practice them." 
Though grief in the Ocean of Saq1sara 
Is preached, and its renunciation urged, 
Few people are really convinced 
And renounce it with determination. 
Though knowing life will ever tum to death, 
Few feel uneasy or think that it will end. 
Though their life is blessed with good prospects, 
Few can practice abstention for a day. 
Though the bliss of Liberation is expounded 
And Saq1sara' s pains are stressed, 

--- PAGE 553 ---
Various Short Tales 
Few can really enter the Dharma Gate. 
Though the profound Pith-Instructions 
Of the \Vhispered Lineage are given without stint, few 
Without fail can practice them. 
Though the teaching of Mahamudra is expounded 
And the Pointing-out demonstration exercised, 
Few can really understand the Essence of Mind. 
To the hermit's life and Guru's wish 
One may always aspire, but few 
Can put them into practice. 
The profound Skillful Path of Niiropa 
May be shown without concealment, 
But those who can really follow it 
Are very, very few. My dear lad, 
You should follow in my footsteps 
If in this life you want to do 
Something that is worthwhile. 
His faith toward Milarepa firmly established, the shepherd followed 
him as a servant and was initiated with the Pith-Instructions. After 
meditating for some time, he eventually became a yogi with good 
Realizations. 
At another time, for the benefit of sentient beings, Jetsun Milarepa went out for alms. Coming to a village in the center of a plain, 
he saw many people enjoying themselves. Some were playing dice, 
chess, and different games, while others were throwing stones and shooting arrows, and some women were weaving wool. Milarepa approached 
them and asked for alms. A young girl said, "My dear Lama, have 
you any kinsmen- father, mother, brother, or sister? Have you a 
house or land?'' The Jetsun replied, "Yes, I have them all, and mine 
are better than most." 
"In that case, they will provide you with all things needed for devotion," replied the girl. "But tell me something about your kinsmen." 
In answer, Milarepa sang: 
My home is the Perfection Paradise, 
My farm good will for all, 
My house the great Compassion, 
And my father's lineage the Tathiigata. 
My uncles are missionaries 

--- PAGE 554 ---
Who spread the Dharma everywhere. 
My forefathers are Tilopa and Naropa, 
My father is the King of Skills, 
My mother, the Fair Lady of Wisdom; 
My elder brother is pure discipline, 
My younger brother, stern diligence, 
My sister is firm faith, and I myself 
Am the offspring of spontaneity. 
My body's elements are Merits, 
And I meditate on Reality. 
My sole visitors are deities. 
As for my planting, I plow 
Nothing but the Dharmakaya. 
All the players in the party swarmed round Milarepa while he was 
singing. The girl then said, "Dear Lama, what you have sung is very 
wonderful. Since you are very rich, I would like to invite you to stay 
here as my spiritual teacher, one in whom I can confide my trust 
during misfortune and place my hope for present and future happiness. I will provide you with all things needed for the service of the 
deities and their holy symbols. You look, indeed, like a man with 
great blessing powers." 
Some young men then said, "Dear Yogi, our delightful games and 
the pleasant work of the girls are signs of our joy and happiness. Do 
the heavenly beings have the same pleasures? You seem to have a 
very good voice. Please sing a song of comment for us on these 
things." The Jetsun replied, "Your joys are not the same as those of 
the heavenly beings. I shall tell you the differences in my song"': 
In the houses of you evil persons, gods 
And holy symbols are like the roots of sins. 
The oil lamps that flame in your stingy hearts 
Are like bonfires before greedy tax-men. 
The owners of much livestock 
Are like meat-eaters' teeth. 
The parents of many children 
Are like pieces of boiled meat 
In the grasp of a hungry man. 
The worn-out elders, the forsaken 
Housecleaners, resembles lonesome flies 
Scenting scum amidst the ruins. 
The owner of a great fortune 
Is like the demon guard, Gordag.8 

--- PAGE 555 ---
Various Short Tales 
The games of throwing stones and shooting arrows 
Are like fierce battles between gods and Asuras. 
The games of chess resemble 
Sordid intrigues between kings. 
Those who play at shooting dice and throwing water 
Are like demons grasping sacrificial food. 
The burdens and tangles of your business 
Resemble cobwebs on the trees. 
Your singing and your dancing 
Are the foolish play of gnomes. 
The spectators of your games 
Are ignorant animals 
Gazing attentively at mirages. 
The commentators on your games 
Are writhing snakes without a head. 
Those who crave for games and diversions 
Are like hungry ghosts, the Fragrance-eaters, 
Greedily sniffing at their hunted food! 
Hearing this song, the listeners all prostrated themselves before the 
Jetsun with faith and veneration. Then the young girl invited Milarepa into her house and served him hospitably. Later, she practiced 
the instructions received from him and was able to enter the Path at 
the time of her death. 
On another occasion, when Jetsun Milarepa went out [again] for 
alms, he reached the middle of a great plain and saw many people 
working on a house. He then lay down on the ground [near by as if 
nothing were going on there]. The hostess said to him, "My dear 
Yogi, you seem to be unoccupied -here are some tools, please use them 
to work for us a little and I will bring you some hot food." After a 
while she returned, and seeing that Milarepa was still lying there, said, 
"No wonder they say that some people deserve to be treated as goodfor-nothing trash! You have plenty of time on your hands, yet you 
won't do anything, not even a little patching work. You are useless!" 
Saying which, she went off and left Milarepa alone. 
Then Milarepa followed her into the house where the workers were 
having their dinner, and begged for some food. The hostess said, 
"One who does not work with his lazy body should not bother to 
eat with his lazy mouth." The Jetsun replied, "I did not help you to 
patch the walls because I was occupied on other business much more 

--- PAGE 556 ---
important than yours." The patrons then asked him what this important business was that had drawn away his attention. In answer, 
Milarepa sang: 
I bow down to all Gurus. Above all, 
I take refuge in the Gracious One! 
You see me as though I were doing nothing, 
But I see myself doing something all the time. 
On the plain of the uncreated Beyond-Extremes, 
I was building busily the Dhyana Wall; 
I had no time to patch clay walls. 
On the Northern Plain9 of Voidness, 
I was taming the wild goats of my desires; 
I had no time to plough my father's land. 
In the realm of Not-two and the Word-beyond, 
I was subduing the demon Ego; 
I had no time to fight with bitter foes. 
In the Palace of Beyond-measure -
The Non-dual Mind-EssenceI was busily attending my affairs; 
I had no time to do household work. 
In the Buddha's Mar.u;lala of my own body 
I was feeding my little child, "Awareness"; 
I had no time to feed others and wipe their noses. 
In the courtyard of Great Bliss, 
I was gathering the Dharma wealth; 
I had no time to make money in this world. 
On the mountain of the immutable Dharmakaya, 
I was herding the steeds of Self-awareness; 
I had no time to tend other sheep and cattle. 
With the clay of my flesh and bones, 
I was building the Stiipa of Immanence; 
I had no time to make the Tsa Tsas.10 
On the triangular Heart Center, 
I was kindling the lamp of Illumination; 
I had no time to offer butter lamps11 to deities. 
In the chapel of the Bliss-Void, 
I was offering Immortality 
To the Buddha of Dhyana-Mind; 
I had no time to make material offerings. 
Upon paper of Immaculate Mind 

--- PAGE 557 ---
Various Short Tales 
I wrote the words of conquering desires; 
I had no time to bother with worldly script. 
In the Drinking-Skull of Siinyata 
I was mixing the Three and Five Poisons;12 
I had no time for priestly rules. 
Filled with love and pity, 
I was guarding all in the Six Realms; 
I had no time to attend my kinsmen. 
Before my Father Gurus, 
I was brooding over their instructions; 
I had no time for worldly actions. 
In a quiet hermitage in the remote mountains, 
I was practicing the Bodhi teachings; 
I had no time to indulge in sleep. 
With my triangular, shell-like mouth, 
I was singing the song of Dharma; 
I had no time for idle talk. 
Hearing this song, all the attendants were converted. Then they 
asked, "Are you, by any chance, the Jetsun Milarepa?" "Yes," replied 
the Jetsun. "We are indeed fortunate!" they all cried. Whereupon they 
bowed down to him, circumambulated him many times, praised him, 
and served him with perfect offerings. The hostess also acknowledged 
her repentence. 
A young man then said to Milarepa, "We would like to come to you 
for instructions; please tell us where your temple is and who provides 
your sustenance." In answer Milarepa sang: 
I bow down to all Father Gurus. 
My temple is an unnamed hermitage, 
My patrons are men and women everywhere, 
No one can tell where I go or stay. 
In the caves where no man comes 
I, the Yogi, am lost to view. 
[When I travel] I carry 
Only my Guru's instructions -lighter 
Than feathers, I shoulder them with ease; 
More handy than gold, I conceal them where I please; 
Stronger than a solid castle, 
In all perils they stand firm. 
In the Three Winters I dwell happily in forests; 

--- PAGE 558 ---
In the Three Summers I stay cheerfully on snow 
mountains; 
In the Three Springs I live with pleasure in 
the marshes; 
In the Three Autumns I wander joyfully for alms. 
In the teaching of my Guru, my mind is always happy; 
Singing songs of inspiration, my mouth is always happ\; 
Wearing cotton from Nepal, my body's always happy. 
In delight I accomplish all and every thingTo me there is but cheer and joy. 
Milarepa accepted this young man as his servant, and later on he 
become a yogi with good Realizations .. Everyone in the assembly also 
vowed to do a specific virtuous deed. 
[Yet again] the Jetsun Milarepa went out for alms and came to~ 
place where men and women were having a beer-drinking party. They 
were all followers of the Dharma in either the Tantra or Siitra schools. 
Milarepa asked them for food, but was derided and ridiculed, especially 
by those who sat in the upper row. The leader of the group then said, 
"Dear Yogi, where did you come from and where are you going?" 
"I am just a person who never mingles with the crowd, but spends 
his life in no-men's mountains," replied the Jetsun. 
"You talk as if you were Milarepa; are you?" 
"Yes, but since I know nothing about the Eight Worldly Dharmas, 
I never mingle with any Buddhist group." 
"This may be very true," replied the leader, "But if you are really 
he, you should be able to preach the Dharma through songs. As we all 
know, the Jetsun Milarepa is a yogi who has completely opened the 
Nac;lis of the Throat Center, and is thus capable of preaching any Dharma without the slightest hesitation or difficulty. To inspire those attending this meeting, therefore, please now sing for us." 
In response, Milarepa sang a song, "The Ocean of Sarpsara": 
The peerless Guru always sits upon my head. 
Alas, is not Sarpsara like the sea? 
Drawing as much water as one pleases, 
It remains the same without abating. 
Are not the Three Precious Ones like Mount Sumeru, 
That never can be shaken by anyone? 

--- PAGE 559 ---
Various Short Tales 
Is not Samaya like a feather 
That's been shed and for which no one cares? 
Are not the pure priestly rules 
Like a leper's corpse abandoned 
By the roadside, which none will touch? 
Are not badgers' skins laid over seats 
Full of thorns that prick the buttocks 
Of eminent priests? 
Jt is not true that many people think 
It meaningless to keep the priestly rules? 
Is it not true that many monks ignore their 
disciplines? 
Are there Mongol bandits invading yogis' cells? 
\Vhy, then, do great yogis stay in towns and villages? 
Are not people craving for rebirth and Bardo? 
\Vhy, then, do they cling so much to their disciples? 
Are woolen clothes in the next life more expensive? 
Why, then, do women make so much of them here? 
Do people fear that Sarpsara may be emptied? 
Why, then, do priests and laymen hanker after 
children? 
Are you reserving food and drink for your next life? 
Why, then, do men and women not give to charity? 
. Is there any misery in Heaven above? 
\Vhy, then, do so few plan to go there? 
Is there any joy below in Hell? 
\Vhy, then, do so many prepare to visit there? 
Do you not know that all sufferings 
And lower realms are the result of sins? 
Surely you know that if you now practice virtue, 
When death comes you will have peace of mind and 
no regrets. 
By this time the whole party had become aware that the singer was 
the real Jetsun Milarepa. Imbued with deep faith and veneration, 
they served him with great hospitality. Milarepa then preached the 
Dharma for them. By practicing these teachings, some of the group 
were able to enter the Path at the time of their death. If these cases 
were all recounted, it would make many more stories. 

--- PAGE 560 ---
In this story [which actually contains a number of tales], Milarepa 
answered various questions asked by his close disciples as well as by 
his general patrons, in different places and at different times. Therefore, it cannot be ascribed to any one specific group. 
NOTES 
1 Three Learnings: See Story 42, Note 3. 
2 The plain-mind (T.T.: Thai.Ma.<;es.Pa.): This term, which one very often 
sees in the literature of Mahamudra, is surprisingly similar to, or rather identical 
with, the Zen phrase, "P'ing Ch'ang Hsin" (the plain, or ordinary mind) which is 
the natural, spontaneous, straightforward, and naked mind. A monk asked Zen 
Master Chao Chou, "What is Tao?" Chao Chou replied, "The ordinary mind is 
Tao." Reading the literature of Zen and Mahamudra one finds many similiar expressions, but this phrase, "the plain-mind," is perhaps the most outstanding one. 
3 Water Wood Crystal Cave: T.T.: <;ei.Phug.Chu.<;in.rDsoft. 
4 To Tse (T.T.: Tho.Tshe.): the magic of producing hail and storms. 
5 The singing bird of Jolmo (T.T.: hJoi.Mo.): This refers to a Tibetan legend, 
but as the source is not available to the translator at this time, he is unable to 
give it. 
6 Cutting-through Instruction (T.T.: gShi.rTsa.Chod.Pahi.gDams.JiiJ'ag.): A 
more literal translation of this phrase would be: "The clear-cut instmction that 
clarifies the basis, or the core, of the issue." 
7 The Four Actions: walking, sitting, standing, and lying. · 
8 Gordag (T.T.: dKor-bDag.): ''The owner of property. It generally signifies the spirit of a demigod who is supposed to be the custodian of the images of all 
Buddhist deities, scriptures, symbols; in short, of all church and sacerdotal proper· 
ties." (Quoted from Chandra Dass' "Tibetan-English Dictionary.") 
9 Northern Plain (T.T.: Byaft.Thaft.): the vast, grassy land of Northern Tibet. 
10 Tsa Tsa (T.T.: Tsha.Tsha.): a miniature Stiipa-shaped oblation, made out of 
clay in a specially designed mold. It is widely used in Tibet. 
11 Butter is the only oil supply available for lamps in Tibet. 
12 The Three Poisons are lust, hatred, and ignorance; the Five Poisons arc 
lust, hatred, ignorance, pride, and jealousy. 

--- PAGE 561 ---
THE PREACHING 
ON MOUNT BONBO 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W
HEN the Jetsun Milarepa was dwelling in the Nirmal).akaya Castle 
at Chu Bar, he cleared up the peerless Gambopa's doubts and 
misgivings concerning the Pith-Instructions. Then he proceeded toward 
the East, but heavy rain fell for many days and nights, and Milarepa's disciples were much wearied by it. 
One day the sky began to clear, and the sun shone pleasantly warm 
upon the hills. Milarepa and his seven disciples went for a walk to 
refresh their bodies and minds. They all felt very comfortable and 
happy at such a beautiful day. 
As they walked to the mountain peak of Bonbo, some of the Repas 
who were not familiar with the region saw the Snow Mountain of 
the Lady of Long Life, and asked the Jetsun, "What is the name of this 
snow mountain?" He replied, "It is called the 'Blue Heights of the 
Fair Goddess'." Whereupon he sang: 
To the neck of the Mountain of Blue Heights, 
To the peak of the rocky Bonbo Hill, 
Come we, eight visitors at leisure. 
Do you not feel happy, my dear sons? 
I, your father, feel wonderful today. 
Here in this joyful gathering of Master and 
disciples, 
I, the old man, cheerfully sing this song 
Of joy and pleasure, that will bring 
Auspicious luck and fortune. 
--- PAGE 562 ---
Come, Dewashun and Shiwa Aui! 
Come and join me in the singing; 
You other Repas sit and listen. 
Know you which this mountain is? 
This is the Mount of the Auspicious Goddess 
of Long Life. 
The triangular, sharp-edged peak looming above 
its waist 
Is like a dumpling on a shell; 
Flowing round its neck are silver-netted streams. 
The high crystal peak that mirrors the first 
beams 
Of sunlight in the morning is the crown, 
Beautified by white hanging clouds. 
Clinging to the lower Mount 
Is perpetual mist and fog; 
All day long the drizzle gently falls, 
While rainbows brightly shine. 
Here autumn flowers bloom 
In different colors, 
And thrive potent herbs 
In great varieties. 
This is the paradise of cattle, 
This homeland of animals! 
This is the Snow Mountain 
The gods talk most about, 
This is where I often meditate. 
In answer to you Repas' questions 
I sing this song, describing 
This mountain vividly. 
The Repa disciples were all pleased by this song. With great interest 
they asked, "How powerful is this goddess? Does she follow the holy 
Dharma, or evil?" In reply, the Jetsun sang: 
The Lady of Long Life, 
The five good sisters, 
Lead the Twelve Goddesses. 
They are worldly Oakinis 
With power to conjure. 
Hostesses of the River Drin, 

--- PAGE 563 ---
The Preaching on Mount Bonbo 
They speak Tibetan and Nepalese; 
They assist all Buddhists 
And protect their worshippers. 
In chief they execute my orders, 
And help you, my son-disciples. 
Through my efforts and theirs Tibet 
Will be led to the virtuous path, 
And great Accomplishments will follow 
In our Ghagyu Lineage. 
The Repas all said, "It is wonderful that these goddesses have been 
converted as your disciple-servants. Please tell us what Dharma you 
preached for them and how they have served you?" In answer Milarepa sang: 
Upon the neck of this Snow Mountain 
I, Milarepa, once preached the Dharma 
To the benevolent local deities. 
I taught them how to distinguish good from evil, 
I preached for them the Siitra's Expedient Truth 
Of the Law of Cause and Effect. 
The savage beasts and Nagas of 
The Four Divisions came to listen. 
The five revengeful J)akinis were the hostesses 
Who invited the preacher. 
The five formidable sisters were the hostesses 
Who attended on the guests. 
Many noble visitors gathered round, 
While Devas and ghosts enjoyed the feast. 
All who were there; I guided to the Dharma 
And converted them, not by great power 
But by compassion and by love. 
With skill I converted those formless ghosts 
and Devas, 
With sincerity I preached to them the Dharma of 
peace. 
I have no regrets for my past deeds. 
Now I am old why should I be regretful? 
Wh~ I die I shall have no fear, but only joy. 

--- PAGE 564 ---
Dear Repas, who stay here to renounce the world, 
You should practice with determination, 
With a happy-to-die feeling when you meditate. 
They again asked, ''Between human beings and Asuras, which are 
better endowed to practice the Dharma, and which serve sentient beings better?" The Jetsun replied, "Human beings are superior in prac-. 
tieing the Dham1a, and more powerful in helping others than the 
Asuras. But the Lady of Long Life is a semihuman goddess.1 She 
will devote herself with great power to serving my Doctrine. I have 
resigned from public life and renounced the Eight Worldly Claims for 
devotion. I have now forgotten many gods and deities and lost con· 
tact with them. Following my steps, you should also renounce the 
Eight Worldly Desires and devote yourselves to undistracted meditation. Listen to my song": 
My Guru's power of blessing 
Descended from above, 
Assuring me of freedom 
From the bonds of Dualism. 
As a vagabond I wandered in all lands 
Until fate brought me to the Gracious One. 
I renounced the world as he bade me, 
Meditating without diversion. 
All evils and misfortunes 
Are now Paths for me. 
In humbleness, I have practiced in solitude; 
Near death, I have exerted myself in devotion. 
I have been meditating all my life 
Till this old age. 
Bliss and warmness thus grow within me. 
I am a yogi who disregards good fortune, 
I am a yogi who abjures worldly happinessOne who remembers the pains of lower Realms. 
I am a yogi who never ingratiates his patronsOne who clings to the hermitage for meditations. 
By the blessing of my Guru 
I was "blown to the top" by a Wind of love. 
Sitting near the edge, I arrived at the center; 
Adhering to humbleness, I cam to nobility. 

--- PAGE 565 ---
The Preaching on Mount Bonbo 
In departing from men, one meets Buddha; 
In undergoing sufferings, one attains happiness; 
By exerting oneself in devotion, compassion 
grows within. 
By remaining in solitude, one acquires more 
followers and disciples; 
By practicing the Ghagyuba teaching, 
The transmission of the Dhar:ma spreads afar. 
With my gracious Guru Marpa 
Sitting e'er upon my head, 
Like an old tiger, without fear of death, 
I am well advanced in age. 
With good cheer I sing this happy song! 
My Repa sons, fritter not your lives away, 
But determined and persevering, 
Strive on in your devotions! 
Milarepa and his disciples remained there for half a day and performed an offering ritual with the provisions they had brought. Then 
some of the disciples expressed their intention to enter different hermitages, others to go for alms to various places, and yet others asked 
the Jetsun for permission to stay with him. On their behalf, Rechungpa [and Gambopa] asked him to give some admonishments for all. In 
response, Milarepa sang a song for Rechungpa and the other disciples 
called "The Six Essentials": 
On behalf of all Repas here, 
My son Gambopa, the learned scholar, 
And son Rechungpa, the unswerving yogi, 
Have asked me to sing to you. 
If you are wise, you will now listen 
To this old man's song. 
A bird knows when and where 
'{o spread and close its wings; 
The true rich man is e'er content; 
A good agnostic e'er plays safe. 
These are my metaphors. 
After this Holy Offering on the tenth day, 
Some of you say they will visit different 
countries, 

--- PAGE 566 ---
Some that they will stay in various hermitages, 
Others that they will follow and stop with me. 
But as for me, if a great yogi 
Aspires to fame and profit, 
He will soon be trapped by devils. 
It is therefore wise, my sons, 
To seek protection from your Father 
And listen to advice and criticism. 
Do not hear my song as a sweet melody, 
But listen carefully to its instructions; 
Forget them not, inscribe 
Them deeply in your heart. 
He who has mastered his Tig Le 
And gained the Power of Attraction, 
Without relying on a qualified Rig Ma,2 
Should never practice Karma Mudra. 
It is as dangerous to do so 
As to climb a steep, rugged mountain. 
Unless with a great, flowing compassion 
One practices the vivid Yidham Samadhi 
For the sole purpose of furthering 
The Dharma and the welfare of all men, 
One should never use the malicious Mantra 
Or practice the Cursing Yoga, 
Lest by Karma he will be 
Reborn a malignant ghost. 
Even if one has mastered his Prii.~a-Mind, 
Unless he can work miracles through his bodily 
power, 
And transform himself into beasts and snakes 
With full realization of Maya and of Voidness, 
He should never bring corpses from cemeteries, 
Lest he provoke the hatred 
Of flesh-eating Oakinis. 
Except to one's own Vajra Brothers 
And to Gurus thrice qualified,3 
One should ne'er reveal his meditational Experience-

--- PAGE 567 ---
The Prea_ching on Mount Bonbo 
Even to men who deeply understand the DharmaNor to devotees of other Lineages 
Of different Practices and Views, 
Let he lose the Power of Blessing 
From the Practice-Succession. 
Give not the Instruction of the Whispered Lineage 
To him whose talent you have not observed; 
Give it not without permission from 
I)akinis, nor for the sake of wealth 
Or expediency to those who ask, 
Lest by sins and transgressions you be shadowed. 
Before one has the power of crushing others' 
doubts 
Or can convert fault-finding unbelievers, 
One should not perform the profound Secret Festival, 
Or demonstrate Tantric Acts in villages 
And towns, lest one be slandered; 
These should only be performed 
In hermitages and in solitude. 
This little song of Six Guides to Devotion 
Is a precious gem for Dharma followers; 
Bear them, my Son-disciples, 
Deeply in your hearts. 
These words were imprinted profoundly on the minds of the heartson disciples. Those junior Repas who wanted to stay with the Jetsun 
then said to him, "We are now in an age of defilement. For the sake 
of inferior and slow-witted persons like us, please preach something 
appropriate to our needs." In response, Milarepa sang: 
Hearken further, my Son-disciples! 
At this time of defilement 
That shadows tlie Dharma of Sakyamuni, 
One should strive with perseverance, 
And carve upon his mind-stone 
The word, "Diligence." 
When you feel sleepy during meditation, try 

--- PAGE 568 ---
To pray hard with your awakened body, mouth, 
and mind. 
When the fire-spark of Wisdom dims, try 
To inflame it with the wind of mindfulness. 
If you want to be freed from Saxpsara's prison, 
Practice hard without diversion. 
If to Nirval).a you aspire, 
Abandon then this world. 
If from the depths of your heart 
You want to practice Dharma, 
Listen to my words and follow in my footsteps. 
If you want to consummate tpe [Supreme] 
Accomplishment, 
Never forget that death will come. 
If hard and long you meditate, all Buddhas 
In the past, the present, and the future 
Will be well pleased. If you are ever 
Straightforward and upright in the Dharma, 
You will receive the grace of your Guru. 
If without error you understand these words, 
You can be sure that more happiness 
And joy will come your way, 
For such is my experience. 
With gratitude and delight, the disciples made up their minds to 
renounce all things of this life, and to strive for their devotions. 
This is the story of Mount Bonbo. 
NOTES 
1 Semihuman goddess (T.T.: Mi.Ci.Rigs.Cig.): This is a free translation- a 
literal translation of this term is difficult. It seems to imply a goddess who has a portion of human inheritance. 
2 Rig Ma: well-gifted and qualified females who aspire to the Tantric 
practice. 
3 Lit.: "with three qualifications." Presumably the three capabilities of a 
Guru: (1) giving proper instructions to the individual disciple, (2) guiding him 
in his devotion, and (3) dispelling hindrances that he may encounter on the Path. 

--- PAGE 569 ---
THE MIRACLE 
OF THE VASE INITIATION 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
NCE when the Jetsun Milarepa was staying at the Belly Cave of 
Nya Non, the Holy Vajra :Oakini revealed herself in person and 
explained to him the hidden meaning of some abstruse passages in 
certain Pith-Instructions in the Tantra of the Whispered Lineage of 
the :Oakinis.1 Then she told him that this teaching could be imparted to a few well-endowed disciples. 
[Before long] Milarepa gave Rechungpa, Ngan Dson Dunpa, and 
other heart-like son-disciples the Vase lnitiation2 of the Whispered 
Succession. [puring the ceremony] Milarepa said to the vase, "I am 
now t0o old, please initiate them yourself." Thereupon, the vase flew 
up into the sky, and initiated all the disciples one by one. 
During this, [they all] heard heavenly music in the sky and smelled 
a fragrance they had never smelled before; also, they beheld flowers 
falling down from the firmament, and many other wondrous, auspicious signs. All the disciples came to a full realization of the wise 
meanings of the Initiation. 
Seeing that they were all amazed by these wonders, the Jetsun sang: 
In the immaculate Mal)<;lala of the Whispered 
Lineage, 
The oblation of Non-desire is made. 
During the precious Vase InitiationA pointer to the Buddha's WisdomWe heard [heavenly] music 
And saw deities in the Mat~<;lala 
Receiving the celestial offerings. 
The vase flew up to give initiation, 
--- PAGE 570 ---
And wondrous Wisdom rose within you all. 
The reason for 2ll this was through 
The grace of the Ghagyu Gurus. 
Milarepa then told the disciples that they should keep this teaching very secret for some time. 
One day Rechungpa completed his painting of the Vajra Yogini. 
Bringing it to the Jetsun, he asked him to sanctify it. Milarepa replied, "This old man does not know how to perform an elaborate ritual 
of sanctification. But I will try to pray the Wisdom-Sattva [the Divine 
Power] 3 to descend and sanctify your picture of the Samaya-Sattya 
[the object to be sanctified]."• So saying, he threw a flower into 
the picture [as if bringing the true Wisdom·Sattva to dissolve in it]. 
Whereupon the picture shook and vibrated [as a sign of receiving 
the blessing power of the Wisdom-Sattva]. Meanwhile, the symbols of 
Buddha's Body, Word, and Mind- the brilliant light of rainbowsshone from the sky and entered and dissolved into the picture. Heavenly flowers also fell down like rain. Milarepa received them on his 
head, as if using a blessing-skull [in a Tantric initiation], and all 
the flowers then dissolved into his body and united with him. As the 
disciples stood wonder-struck, Milarepa sang: 
The pictorial form of the Samaya-Sattva 
Is blessed by the holy light of Body, Word, 
and Mind; 
This is the embodiment of the Wisdom-Sattva, 
The Body of the Real. 
When the light [of Wisdom] enters the picture 
And dissolves, it completes the blessing. 
Though Mila is old and did not rise, 
The Wisdom Oakinis have brought divine 
Flowers from the Land of Dharmakaya, 
Which merged into the Patron Buddha's [picture]. 
When I performed this sanctifying rite 
These wondrous flowers adorned my head and body; 
Then the Patron Buddha entered and united with me. 
You who have witnessed this great miracle 
Are indeed well-gifted and well-destined. 

--- PAGE 571 ---
The Miracle of the Vase Inititiation 
Thus, Rechungpa and the other disciples all witnessed the fact that 
the Jetsun was no different from the Vajra Yogin! Herself. 
This is the story of the [Vase] Initiation and of the sanctification 
of [Rechungpa's picture of the Vajra Yogin!]. 
NOTES 
1 Whispered Lineage of the I;>akini (T.T.: mKhah.hGro.sNan.brGyud.). 
2 Vase Initiation (T.T.: Bum.dWan.): This is the first initiation among the 
four Anuttara Tantra Initiations. The disciple is given the instruction of the Arising Yoga, which includes all Mantra and Ma1,14ala practices. 
3, 4 Wisdom-Sattva (T.T.: Ye.<;es. Sems.Pa.), and Samaya-Sattva (T.T.: Dam. 
Tshig.Sems.Pa.): In sanctifying an object or symbol, such as a Buddha's image, 
figure, or Stiipa, a consecration rite called Rab.gNas. is held. The sanctified object 
is called Dam.Tshig.Sems.Pa. or Dam.Tshig.Pa., and the divine consecrating power, 
embodied in a form identical with the object, is called Ye.<;es.Sems.Pa., or Ye. 
Ges.Pa. 

--- PAGE 572 ---
THE STORY OF 
SHINDORMO AND LESEBUM 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
S 
mNOOx:t.IO and Lese were a [married] couple who had had great 
faith in the Jetsun from early days. At one time they invited him 
to Tsar Ma. As soon as Shindormo saw him coming, she [went to 
him] at once and held his hands, saying, "Now that we are growing 
old and deatli is approaching, we are afraid, and sorry that we have 
not been able to practice the Dharma with you." Saying this, she cried 
mournfully for a long time. Milarepa said to her, "My dear patroness, 
except for advanced Dharma practitioners, the pains of birth, decay, 
illness, and death descend upon everyone. It is good to think about 
and fear them, because this enables one to practice the Dharma when 
death is approaching." Whereupon he sang: 
In the river of birth, decay, illness, 
And death we worldly beings are submerged; 
Who can escape these pains on earth? 
We drift on with the tide. Amidst 
Waves of misery and darkness 
We Row on and on. Seldom in 
SaqlSara can one find joy. 
More miseries come by trying to avoid them; 
Through pursuing pleasures one's sins increase. 
To be free from pain, wrong 
Deeds should be shunned. 
When death draws near, the wise 
Always practice Dharma. 
SS2 

--- PAGE 573 ---
The Story of Shindormo and Lesebum 
"I do not know how to observe the suffering of birth," said Shindonna, "Please instruct me how to meditate upon it." In answer, the 
Jetsun sang: 
My faithful patroness, I will 
Explain the suffering of birth. 
The wanderer in the Bardo plane 
Is the Alaya Consciousness. · 
Driven by lust and hatred 
It enters a mother's womb. 
Therein it feels like a fish 
In a rock's crevice caught. 
Sleeping in blood and yellow fluid, 
It is pillowed in discharges; 
Crammed in filth, it suffers pain. 
A bad body from bad Karma's born. 
Though remembering past lives, 
It cannot say a single word. 
Now scorched by heat, 
Now frozen by the cold, 
In nine months it emerges 
From the womb in pain 
Excruciating, as if 
Pulled out gripped by pliers. 
When from the womb its head is squeezed, the pain 
Is like being thrown into a bramble pit. 
The tiny body on the mother's lap, 
Feels like a sparrow grappled by a hawk. 
When from the baby's tender body 
The blood and filth are being cleansed, 
The pain is like being flayed alive. 
When the umbilical cord is cut, 
It feels as though the spine were severed. 
When wrapped in the cradle it feels bound 
By chains, imprisoned in a dungeon. 
He who realizes not the truth of No-arising, 
Never can escape from the dread pangs of birth. 
There is no time to postpone devotion: 

--- PAGE 574 ---
When one dies one's greatest need 
Is the divine Dharma. 
You should then exert yourself 
To practice Buddha's teaching. 
Shindormo asked again, "Please preach for us the sufferings of old 
age." In response, the Jetsun sang: 
Listen, my good patrons, listen 
To the sufferings of old age. 
Painful is it to see one's body 
Becoming frail and quite worn out. 
VVho can help but feel dismayed 
At the threat of growing old? 
When old age descends upon one, 
His straight body becomes bent; 
When he tries to step firmly, 
He staggers against his will; 
His black hairs tum white, 
His clear eyes grow dim; 
His head shakes with dizziness, 
And his keen ears tum deaf; 
His ruddy cheeks grow pale, 
And his blood dries up. 
His nose - the pillar of his face - sinks in; 
His teeth - the essence of his bones - protrude. 
Losing control of tongue, he stammers. 
On the approach of death, his anguish and debts 
grow. 
He gathers food and friends, 
But he cannot keep them; 
Trying not to suffer, 
He only suffers more; 
When he tells the truth to people, 
Seldom is he believed; 
The sons and nephews he has raised 
And cherished, oft become his foes. 
He gives away his savings, 
But wins no gratitude. 

--- PAGE 575 ---
The Story of Shindormo and Lesebum 
Unless you realize the truth of Non-decay, 
You will suffer misery in old age. 
He who when old neglects the Dharma, 
Should know that he is bound by Karma. 
It is good to practice the Divine 
Dharma while you still can breathe. 
Shindormo then said, "What you have just told us is very true; I 
have experienced these things myself. Now please preach for us the 
suffenngs of sickness." In reply, Milarepa sang: 
Dear patrons, you who know grief and sorrow, 
Listen to the miseries of sickness. 
This frail body is subject e'er to sickness, 
So that one suffers excruciating pain. 
The illnesses of Prat:~a, mind, gall, and phlegm1 
Constantly invade this frail human body, 
Causing its blood and matter to be heated; 
The organs are thus gripped by pain. 
In a safe and easy bed 
The sick man feels no comfort, 
But turns and tosses, groaning in lament. 
Through the Karma of [past] meanness, 
Though with best of food you feed him, 
He vomits all that he can take. 
When you lay him in the cool, 
He stills feels hot and burning; 
When you wrap him in warm cloth, 
He feels cold as though soaked in sleet. 
Though friends and kinsmen gather round, 
None can relieve or share his pains. 
Though warlocks and physicians are proficient, 
They cannot help cases caused by Ripening Karma. 
He who has not realized the truth of No-illness, 
Much suffering must undergo. 
Since we know not when sicknesses will strike, 
It is wise to practice Holy DharmaThe sure conqueror of illness! 
"I hope to practice [more] Dharma when death draws near," said 

--- PAGE 576 ---
Shindormo, "Now please preach for me the suffering of death." In answer, Milarepa sang: 
Listen, my disheartened patroness: 
Like the pain of repaying compound debts, 
One must undergo the suffering of death. 
Yama's guards catch and carry one 
When the time of death arrives. 
The rich man cannot buy it off with money, 
With his sword the hero cannot conquer it, 
Nor can the clever woman outwit it by a trick. 
Even the learned scholar cannot 
Postpone it with his eloquence. 
Here, no coward like a fox can sneak away; 
Here, the unlucky cannot make appeal, 
Nor can a brave man here display his valor. 
When all the Na<;lis converge in the body, 
One is crushed as if between two mountainsAll vision and sensation become dim. 
When Bon priests and diviners become useless, 
The trusted physician yields to his despair. 
None can communicate with the dying man, 
Protecting guards and Devas vanish into nought. 
Though the breath has not completely stopped, 
One can all but smell the stale odor of dead flesh. 
Like a lump of coal in chilly ashes 
One approaches to the brink of death. 
When dying, some still count the dates and stars; 
Others cry and shout and groan; 
Some think of worldly goods; 
Some that their hard-earned wealth 
Will be enjoyed by others. 
However deep one's love or great one's sympathy, 
He can but depart and journey on alone. 
His good friend and consort 
Can only leave him there; 
In a bundle,his beloved body 
Will be folded and carried off, 
Then thrown in water, burned in fire, 
Or simply cast off in a desolate land. 

--- PAGE 577 ---
The Story of Shindormo and Lesebum 
Faithful patrons, what in the end can we retain? 
Must we sit idly by and let all things go? 
When your breath stops tomorrow 
No wealth on earth can help you. 
Why, then, should one be mean? 
Kind kinsmen circle round 
The bed of the dying, 
But none can help him for a moment. 
Knowing that all must be left behind, 
One realizes that all great love 
And attachment must be futile. 
\Vhen that final moment comes, 
Only Holy Dharma helps. 
You should strive, dear patroness, 
For a readiness to die! 
Be certain and ready; when the time 
Comes, you will have no fear and no regret. 
Whereupon, Shindormo besought the Jetsun for instructions. Practicing them [for some time, she gained such great progress that] at the 
time of her death she entered the initial stage of the Path. 
About the same time [another patroness], Lesebum, invited Milarepa 
to stay with her. She said, "Although you, Jetsun Father and Sons, cannot stay with us long, remain at least for a few days." Upon this 
earnest request, Milarepa and his disciples stayed with her for seven 
days. 
During this period, the people of Nya Non gathered in large numbers to make Tsa Tsa [miniature images of Buddha]. All the villagers helped with the work. Lesebum then asked Milarepa, "Would 
you, Jetsun Father and Sons, care to come to this meeting to enjoy 
yourselves?" "No," replied Milarepa, "I do not care to go." "Then," 
said Lesebum, "since this is a day-for-merit, I hope your Reverence will 
be kind enough to make offerings in my prayer room, and mold some 
Tsa Tsa for me. For the sake of sentient beings, please also look after 
my baby son,' my sheep, and my household during my absence." 
Well-dressed and adorned, she then went to the gathering. But 
Mila:repa and his disciples let the time pass by and did nothing she 
had requested. As a consequence, the sheep trampled the field and 

--- PAGE 578 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS 01<' MILAREPA 
ate up all the crops [and, worst of all,] when Lesebum entered the 
house on her return, her baby was crying at the top of his lungs. She 
thus became aware that the Jetsun had done nothing she had asked. 
She then said, "It is understandable .that you did not do the other 
things I asked you, but a Buddhist should have great compassion; is 
it not then a fault, and a great shame, that you disregarded the child 
and the sheep when they were in need?" In reply, the Jetsun sang: 
On the pasture of the Great Bliss, 
I was herding Immortal Sheep; 
I had no time to watch 
Those of blood and flesh. 
I leave them, Lese bum, for you! 
As a mother of Love and Great Compassion, 
I was tending Illumination's child; 
So I had no appetite 
To tend the nose-wiping boy. 
I leave him, Lesebum, to you! 
On the firm mountain of No-change 
I was making Tsa Tsa of Mindfulness; 
I had no time to mold clay images. 
I leave them, Lesebum, for you! 
In the prayer-room of my upper body 
I was lighting Illumination's lamp; 
I could not erect the pole 
For hanging prayer-flags.2 
I leave that, Lesebum, to you! 
In this shabby house of my phantom body, 
I was cleansing the dirt of normal thoughts; 
I had no time to clean your house. 
I leave it, Lesebum, to you! 
Among the many forms of life, 
I was watching Maya's play; 
I could not wash the cups and dishes. 
I leave them, Lesebum, for you! 
Lesebum replied, "Oh Jetsun, please do not look down upon the 
good deeds that we worldly beings try our best to do. I have also 

--- PAGE 579 ---
The Story of Shindormo and Lesebum 
served many other Lamas [besides you]." In answer, Milarepa sang: 
To serve a Lama without compassion 
Is like worshipping a one-eyed demon; 
He and patron will misfortune meet. 
Practicing the Dharma without Bodhi-Mind 
Is the self-delusion of a fool; 
It but intensifies desire and greed. 
To give alms with partiality 
Is like paying back a feast; 
It will only fortify more hopes. 
To make offerings to the wrong person 
Is like giving an imposter money; 
It only brings more trouble and confusion. 
To give charity without compassion 
Is like tying oneself to a pillar 
With a strong leather strap; 
It only binds one tighter [in Sa~psara's prison]. 
Bearing a high view without taming the mind, 
Is like a swaggerer bragging about 
Nonsense through a worn-out throat; 
One only violates the virtues. 
To meditate without knowing the way 
Is like a juggler conjuring a magic 
House. Its falsehood will soon be exposed. 
To engage in various [Tantric] acts 
Without a real sign of Karma, is like 
A madman from a hot spring drinking; 
The more he drinks, the thirstier he gets. 
If, from wordly desires, 
One has lead a solemn life, 
It is like wrapping filth 
In a pretty dress of silk -
Beautiful and grand without, 
Within stinking and rotten. 

--- PAGE 580 ---
"Accomplishment" that is joined 
With desires and self-conceit, 
Is like a doll of clay. 
It will soon break in pieces 
When tested by striking. 
Hearing this song, Lesebum became very remorseful. Taking a fine 
jewel from among her ornaments she offered it to the Jetsun, and 
besought him for the Instructions. Milarepa then sang, "The Words 
of the Gem": 
Hearken, my rich Lesebum 
With sparkling intelligence! 
. When you turn back and look into your body, 
Meditate without craving for pleasures. 
When you turn back and look into your mouth, 
Meditate in silence and in quiet. 
When you turn back and look into your mind, 
Meditate without wavering thoughts. 
Keep body, mouth, and mind from distractions, 
And try to practice without practicing. 
Following these instructions in her meditation, Lesebum gained 
some experience. She then sang a song to the Jetsun as her Seven 
Offerings:3 
To you, the wondrous [yogi] clad in cotton, 
Who has indomitable courage, 
A man assured of freedom, 
Beyond both greed and fear, 
To you, ascetic Repa, I pay homage, 
To you, great Repa, I present my offerings. 
I now repent all my wrongdoings before you 
And take sympathetic joy in all your deeds. 
I pray you to turn the Wheel of Dharma, 
I beg you, Nirva~Ja ne'er to enter. 
To all beings I now dedicate my merits. 
When I watch my body, and try 
To stop craving for pleasure, 
The craving oft arises. 

--- PAGE 581 ---
The Story of Shindormo and Lesebum 
When I observe my mouth, and try 
To subdue the wish for talking, 
Alas, the longing still prevails. 
When I watch my mind, and try without 
Wandering thoughts to meditate, 
Wandering thoughts always arise. 
When I concentrate my body, mouth, 
And mind to practice the Non-practice, 
The effort-making practice is still there. 
To overcome these difficulties 
And to further my progress, 
Pray grant me more instructions. 
In response to her request, the Jetsun sang: 
Listen, listen, Lesebum, with care. 
If you are harassed by craving for pleasure, 
Leave all your associates, 
Giving all away in alms; 
Rest yourself at ease without 
Yearning or attachment. 
When you feel like talking, try 
To abjure worldly desires. 
Beware of your pride and egotism, 
And rest yourself at ease in humbleness. 
If wavering thoughts keep on arising, 
Catch hold of your Self-mind with alertness. 
Be attached not to Sarpsara nor Nirval}.a, 
But rest yourself at ease in full Equality. 
Let what arises rise, 
Take care not to follow. 
If in meditation you still tend to strive, 
Try to arouse for all a great compassion, 
Be identified with the All-Merciful. 
Always think of your Guru as sitting on your head, 
And meditate with perseverance on the Void. 
--- PAGE 582 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONCS OF MILAREPA 
Then dedicate to all your merit. 
On my words ponder, Lesebum, 
And practice with zeal the Dharma. 
In accordance with Milarepa's instructions, Lesebum continued her 
meditation. Eventually she became a yogini, and reached the initial 
stage of the Path. 
This is the story of Shindormo and Lesebum. 
NOTES 
1 The Pra~Ja, gall, and phlegm illnesses: According to Tibetan pathology, 
these are the three major sicknesses of man, i.e., the sickness of Pra~Ja (T.T.: rLuii.), 
of gall (T.T.: mi<hris.Pa.), and of phlegm (T.T.: Bad.I<an.). 
2 Prayer-flags: Certain Mantras and prayers are printed on specially designed 
flags made of thin cloth, which are then hung on high poles as a symbol of blessing 
and good will. 
3 Seven Offerings (T.T.: Yan.Lag.bDun.Pa.): This is the famous and widely 
practiced "Seven Offerings" exemplified by Bodhisattva Samantabhadra as descnbed 
in the Avataf!lsaka Siitra. The prayer of the Seven Offerings is included in almost 
every ritual and ceremony of Tibetan Buddhism; they are: (I) to pay homage to 
all the Buddhas and sages in the infinite universes; (2) to make offerings to them; 
(3) to confess one's sins; (4) to delight in all virtues of others, or to feel sympathtic 
·joy over others' merits; ( 5) to beseech Buddhas and sages to preach the Dharma; 
(6) to implore Buddhas and sages not to enter Nirvli~Ja; and (7) to dedicate all 
merits that one has accumulated to the attainment of Buddhahood. 
The original Samantabhadra's Vows- the exemplars of "the Bodhisattva's 
Act," are not seven as stated in the Avataf!lsaka Siitra, but ten; three are omitted 
in the so-called Seven Offerings. 

--- PAGE 583 ---
MILAREPA AND 
THE DYING SHEEP 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A
T ONE time when the Jetsun Milarepa and his heart-son Rechungpa were living in the Belly Cave of Nya Non, Rechungpa was 
still harboring a slight craving for worldly pleasures, which the Jetsun 
had often admonished him to give up. But Rechungpa thought, "I 
have already renounced my native land and the Eight Worldly Desires, 
yet the Jetsun considers this insufficient- merely halfway in the practice of the .Dharma. Can this really be true?" Full of doubt, he questioned Milarepa, who answered, "In a general sense what you have 
said m~y be true, but by itself it is not enough. Now listen to my 
song": 
He who sits upon my head 
In the Palace of Great Bliss, 
Is the Immaculate One -
The glory of all merits. 
He [Marpa], is the essence of the Lineage Gurus, 
The source of my ~rpetual inspiration. 
To Him I pay sincerest homage, 
To Him I send my heart-felt praise! 
Though you renounce your native land 
Living far away alone, 
You must still observe the precepts. 
He who cares for his good name, 
Will fall into the world once more. 
Though you renounce good food and care, 
--- PAGE 584 ---
Be careful in receiving alms. 
He who still yearns for tasty food, 
Will fall into the world again. 
Though an elegant garment is far superior to 
a plain dress, 
It must be made according to the principle of 
tailoring. 
Yogis who cling to fine, soft clothes 
Will fall into the world once more. 
If you've forsaken home and land, 
Modest be and persevering. 
He who aspires to fame and eminence, 
Will fall into the world again. 
When you forsake the "big" estate 
And till your own small land [of self], 
You must obey the rules of farming. 
Should you expect big harvests quickly, 
You will fall in to the world once more. 
Saypsara in itself is groundless and unreal; 
When you look you find it hard 
To define, ungraspable. 
Yet when you realize it, 
It is Nirvat:ta itself. 
All things in themselves are void; 
A yogi is attached to nothing. 
Rechungpa asked, "Since I am following the Path of Tantric Skill, 
may I take some comfort and enjoyment to increase my devotion?" 
The Jetsun answered, "If you can really advance your devotion by 
means of enjoyments and pleasures, you may use them, but not if 
they only increase your [worldly] desires. I was enjoined by my Guru, 
Marpa, to renounce all worldly desires for an ascetic life of devotion. 
As a result of following his words throughout my life, a little merit 
has now grown within me. You, also, should renounce all Eight 
Worldly Desires and meditate hard while you still have the chance. 
Now hearken to my song": 
Remember how your Guru lived 
And bear in mind his honeyed words. 

--- PAGE 585 ---
Milarepa and the Dying Sheep 
He who wastes a chance for Dharma, 
Will never have another. 
Bear, then, in mind the Buddha's teaching 
And practice it with perseverance: 
By clinging to things of this life, 
In the next, one suffers more. 
If you crave for pleasures 
Your troubles but increase. 
One is indeed most foolish 
To miss a chance for Dharma. 
Practice hard in fear of death! 
Committing sins will draw 
You to the Lower Realms. 
By pretending and deceiving, 
You cheat and mislead yourself. 
Merits diminish with 
The growth of evil thoughts. 
If you are concerned with future life, 
Diligently practice your devotions. 
A yogi longing for good clothes 
Will soon lose his mind; 
A yogi yearning for good food 
Will soon do bad deeds; 
A yogi loving pleasant words 
Will not gain, but lose. 
Renounce worldly parsuits, Rechungpa, 
Devote yourself to meditation. 
If you try to get a patron 
Who is rich, you will meet a foe. 
He who likes to be surrounded 
By crowds, will soon be disappointed. 
He who hoards much wealth and money, 
Is soon filled with vicious thoughts. 
Meditate, my son Rechungpa, 
And put your mind into the Dharma. 
Realization will be won 
At last by he who practices; 
. He who cannot practice 
But only talks and brags, 
Is always telling lies. 
--- PAGE 586 ---
Alas, how hard it is to find 
The chance and time to practice long. 
Rechungpa, try to meditate without diversions! 
If you merge your mind with the Dharma, 
You will e'er be gay and joyful; 
You will always find it better 
If you dwell oft in solitude. 
Son Rechungpa, may the precious 
Illuminating-Void Samadhi 
Remain forever in your mind! 
Milarepa then thought, "Because of my urging, Rechungpa's desires 
for worldly pleasures may have lessened to a certain extent, yet he 
still cannot overcome [all of] his wrong inclinations. I shall try to 
further his spirit of renunciation." So he took him to the market of Nya 
Non for alms. 
Many butchers had gathered there. The meat was piled up like 
walls, animals' heads were stacked in huge heaps,· skins were scattered over the ground, and blood ran together like water in a pond. 
In addition, rows of livestock were fastened to stakes for slaughtering. 
An old man from Mon with a crippled arm was butchering a big 
black sheep, pulling out its entrails while it was still alive. Fatally 
wounded, it managed to escape and staggered moaning toward the 
Jetsun for help. Watching this pitiful scene, Milarepa shed many tears. 
He immediately performed the Transformation Yoga for the sheep 
and delivered its soul [consciousness] to the Bodhi-Path. Whereupon, 
with overwhelming compassion, Milarepa sang: 
How pitiful are sentient beings in Sarpsaral 
Looking upward to the Path of Liberation, 
How can one but feel sorrow for these sinful men. 
How foolish and sad it is to indulge in killing, 
When by good luck and Karma one has a human form. 
How sad it is to do an act 
That in the end will hurt oneself. 
How sad it is to build a sinful wall 
Of meat made of one's dying parents' flesh. 
How sad it is to see meat 
Eaten and blood flowing. 
How sad it is to know confusions 
And delusions fill the minds of men. 
How sad it is to find but vice, 

--- PAGE 587 ---
Milarepa and the Dying Sheep 
Not love, in people's hearts. 
How sad it is to see 
That blindness veils all men 
Who cherish sinful deeds. 
Craving causes misery, 
While worldly deeds bring pain. 
With this in mind one feels sorrowful, 
Thinking thus, one searches for a cure. 
When I think of those who never 
Take heed to their future lives, 
But indulge in evil deeds, 
I feel most disturbed and sad, 
And deeply fearful for them. 
Rechungpa, seeing all these things, 
Don't you remember Holy Dharma? Don't 
You in Saqts1ira lose all heart? 
Rouse the spirit of renunciation, go, 
Rechungpa, to the cave to meditate! 
Heed the bounty of your Guru 
And avoid all sinful deeds; 
Casting worldly things aside 
Stay firm in your practice. 
Keep your good vows and devote 
Your life to meditation. 
Rechungpa was filled with sadness, and a fervent desire for renun· 
ciation arose from the depth of his heart. Shedding many tears, he 
vowed, "Dear Jetsun, from now on I shall renounce all worldly desires and pleasures, and devote myself to meditation. Let us, Master 
and servant, go to the remote mountains; but tell me where." In an· 
swer, Milarepa sang: 
Alas, trapped by evil Karmas, in the dark 
Sentient beings wander in Saqtsara. 
The robber, wandering thoughts, 
Drives them wild, thus depriving them 
Of the chance for cultivation. 
Wake up, meditate now, everyone! 
Let us two Repas go to the Snow Lashi mountain. 

--- PAGE 588 ---
Long and hazardous is Sa111sara's road, pressing 
And pernicious is the bandit of Five Poisons, 
But Son Rechungpa, hold tight your ChildOf-Awareness, seek Wisdom's Escort. 
Sinful men seldom think that death will come; 
To Snow Lashi we two Repas 
Will go now for meditation! 
High is the Mountain-of-Faults, 
Fearful the hounds and hunters. 
The "Dyana-beast" is e'er exposed 
To the danger of being captured. 
Be wise, then, escape to the Land of Peace. 
Sinful men seldom think that death will come; 
To Snow Lashi we two Repas. 
Will go now for meditation! 
This house of the human body 
Is falling down and, weathered 
By seepage of food and drink, is 
Decaying with the months and years; 
'Tis dangerous to live in it. 
Escape then to safety, 
Ready to die with joy. 
Sinful men seldom think that death will come; 
To Snow Lashi we two Repas 
Will go now for meditation! 
Deep and full of perils is Sa111sara's sea; 
It is wise to cross it now 
In the boat of Awartness. 
Fearful is confusion's rolling tide; 
Escape from it now, 
To the "Not-Two Land." 
Sinful men seldom think that death will come; 
To Snow Lashi we two Repas 
Will go now for meditation! 
Wide is the marshy bog of lust, 
Harassing the muddy swamp of family life; 
Be wise, escape from it, riding 
Renunciation's Elephant. 
Be wise and escape to safety, 

--- PAGE 589 ---
· Milarepa and the Dying Sheep 
In the dry land of Liberation! 
Sinful men seldom think that death will come; 
To Snow Lashi we two Repas 
Will go now for meditation! 
Great is the danger now of falling 
Into Hinayana's views and deeds; 
Only the ignorant make 
About nothing much ado. 
Sinful men seldom think that death will come; 
To Snow Lashi we two Repas 
Will go now for meditation! 
On this occasion, many people in the bazaar were spontaneously 
confirmed with great faith in the Jetson and his son. They all wanted 
to offer them much food and service, but Milarepa told them that 
their food was the food of sin [directly produced) through the Eight 
Worldly Desires, and refused to accept it. He and Rechungpa then 
set out on their journey to the Snow Mountain of Lashi. 
This is the story of Milarepa's admonishments on the importance 
of being ready to die. 

--- PAGE 590 ---
so 
THE BEER-DRINKING SONG 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A
T ONE time when the Jetsun Milarepa and his son Rechungpa 
were living in the Great Conquering Demon Cave1 on Lashi Snow 
Mountain, the frightful conjurations created by the Asuras became 
so great that Rechungpa (had to] hide in the back of the cave and 
absorb himself in Samiidhi. 
One day a great number of Devas and specters arrived, and displaying many dreadful forms, threw numerous weapons at Milarepa to 
frighten him. With threatening voices, they shouted, "Let us grab him, 
eat his flesh and drink his blood!" But [undaunted] Milarepa sang: 
I pray all Gurus to subdue 
All hatred and malignance! 
Pitiable are you ghosts and demons. 
Accustomed to evil thoughts and deeds, 
With joy·you afflict sentient beings. 
Addicted to flesh-eating, 
You crave to kill and strangle! 
Born as hungry ghosts 
Ugly and repulsive, 
You commit more sinful deeds. 
You are doomed to go to Hell. 
Since you forget the seed of Liberation, 
You find the door to freedom ever shut. 
Alas, how pitiable and sad this is! 
Sitting on Compassion-Voidness' seat, 
I can perform all miracles. 
If you ghosts can grab and eat me, 
--- PAGE 591 ---
The Beer-drinking Song 
I shall be most pleased and happy. 
With compassion's Bodhi-Mind 
I rejoice to see you here! 
Whereupon Milarepa entered the Water-Samlidhi.2 Before long 
more demon and Deva armies arrived. Among them was an extremely 
fearful demoness who said, "Who is this man?" A demon replied, "Let 
us first move to [the safe side] near the water, and see." In doing so 
he kicked loose a few pebbles [with a clatter], and at that very moment Milarepa suddenly appeared, saying, "I am here!" He also 
showed his naked body to the demons who, surprised and panicstricken, all ran away. 
After a while they returned and once more vainly attacked Milarepa with their magic. Finally they gave up, crying, "Let us all be reconciled!" 
In a state of great compassion Milarepa then sang: 
Listen carefully, you Non-men, 
You army of ill-Karm'd demons. 
Your evil deeds will harm none but yourselves! 
Since to me all forms are but the Dharmakaya, 
Even a demon army is my glory. 
Hearken, Devas and demons all. If you 
Will take refuge in the Triple Gem,3 
You will be reborn in a good place. 
If you stop eating flesh and drinking blood, 
You will attain high birth and freedom. 
If you stop harming others, then 
You will soon enter Bodhi's Path; 
If you withdraw from sinful deeds, 
You can embrace the Buddhist Doctrine. 
Only by practicing Ten Merits 
Can you understand the meaning 
Of your Guru's [firm] instructions! 
Only when you have removed 
Confusions of body, word, and 
Mind can you join the order of 
Illumination-holders. Only when 
You vow to keep the disciplines can we 

--- PAGE 592 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONCS OF MILAREPA 
Agree as friends. Only when you keep 
Samaya's precepts can you be my disciples. 
In repentence, the demons were all converted. They said, "From 
now on we will obey your orders. Please teach us the Dharma." Mila· 
repa then preached for them the truth of Karma, the teaching of 
Taking-in-Refuge, and the Growth of the Bodhi-Mind. Confirmed with 
faith, the demons all offered their lives to Milarepa as a pledge of 
their solemn vows and departed. 
The next morning Milarepa went to Rechungpa and asked, "Did 
anything happen ·to you last night?" "I was in the [Samadhi of] Illumination," said Rechungpa, "and had an amusing vision: someone 
came and threw a pebble at you while you were lying on your bed. 
Did it hit you?" Milarepa replied, "In great joyfulness, my body 
turned into water last night.• I am not sure whether that pebble hit 
me or not, but my chest feels a little uncomfortable. You may check 
on it for me." So saying, he again transformed his body into water, 
wherein Rechungpa found a small pebble and removed it. After that 
the Jetsun felt comfortable once more. 
At that time many disciples came to visit Milarepa. One day he 
suggested that they all take a walk to the [top of the] high mountain in front of Lashi. But the disciples said, "It will be too strenuous 
for you because of your age. We advise you not to go." The Jetsun 
replied, "I think I can manage it easily." Whereupon he sang: 
I bow down to all Gurus! 
Milarepa wants to climb that 
Mountain peak, but he is now too old; 
His body is worn out and frail. 
Shall he lie still and restful 
Like you, my brother Mountain? 
Milarepa had hardly finished singing when he suddenly appeared 
on the top of a cliff - his feet set firmly on the rock. Then he ascended higher until he reached the top, sitting there comfortably for some 
time [clothed] in a rainbow-shroud. He then flew back to the cave 
and said to the disciples "I need someone to pour beer for me when 
I am up there." "But please tell us how do we get there and how 
we can serve you beer?" they asked. "If you want to reach the mountain peak," replied, Milarepa, "you should practice like this": 
Hearken, my sons! If you want 

--- PAGE 593 ---
The Beer-drinking Song 
To climb the mountain peak 
To enjoy the view, 
You should hold the Self-mind's light, 
Tie [it] with a great "Knot," 
And catch it with a firm "Hook." 
If you practice thus 
You can climb the mountain peak 
To enjoy the view. 
Come, you gifted· men and women, 
Drink the brew of Experience! 
Come "inside" to enjoy the sceneSee it and enjoy it to the full! 
The incapable remain outside; 
Those who cannot drink pure 
Beer may quaff small-beer. 
He who cannot strive for Bodhi, 
Should strive for superior birth. 
Rechungpa said, "I can practice the Dharma and aspire to drink 
the beer. But please show me how." The Jetsun replied, "The best 
way to drink the 'beer' is to follow the good advice of Marpa." Then 
he sang: 
I bow down to the Translator Marpa 
Who in primordial Reality 
Abides, Master of the essential truths. 
It is not easy to describe him. 
Like the sky, he is bright and clean, 
Omnipresent as the sun and moon; 
He never discriminates between 
"High" and "low," like bushes in a swamp. 
He is my Lord Buddha, 
Sitting upon my head, 
My glory and adornment. 
In the Six Realms the chief 
Actors are human beings 
Who use their poorer crops to brew 
Beer in the autumn and the spring. 
But to brew for ourselves, 
The Dharma's followers, 
Build a fireplace with Three Gates, prepare 

--- PAGE 594 ---
. A cauldron of Sunyata, and then fill it 
With grain of the pure White Element5 
And the water of Compassion. 
Then light the fire of Wisdom 
And boil well the mash. 
In the Central Plain where all is equal, 
The flag of the Great Bliss is raised. 
When the yeast of instruction has been added 
[To the cauldron] one then may sleep at ease 
On the bed of the Four Infinities. 
The fermented barley·of One-in-Many 
Is taken out and put into a jar. 
Strengthened by non-dual Wisdom-Skill, 
The beer of Five Prajfias is matured; 
At the entrance of the Wish-fulfilling 
House, the beer of pure nectar is purified. 
The Pure Heruka8 causes it, by the 
Heruka of Totality is it conditioned 
And by the Lotus Heruka colored. 
Its smell is the Heruka of Variety; 
Its taste, of Vajra; and its touch, of Gaiety. 
I am a yogi who drinks beer, because 
It illumines the Dharma Body, 
Completes the Body of Sambhoga, 
And gives form to all Nirmat:takayas. 
From Non-cessation's pulp 
Only men with hardened heads 
Can drink this nectar beer. 
Here is another parable: 
From the brew of Dharma-Essence 
Comes precious and stimulating beer; 
To Gurus and Buddhas of the Three Perfections 
It is a superb oblation! 
Along the middle way of Skillful-Wisdom 
The rules of Samaya are observed; 
Thus the Mat:tc;lala's deities are pleased. 
With the brew of common and special instructions 

--- PAGE 595 ---
The Beer-drinking Song 
[Mystical] sensations are obtained; 
One thus fulfills one's wishes 
And those of other men. 
Whoever in the cup of Six Adornments7 
Drinks the pure beer· of the Whispered Lineage, 
In him will the Great Bliss flame up. 
Of this Bliss a single sip 
Dispells all griefs and sorrows. 
This is the beer a yogi drinks -
A special Dharma shared by few, 
. An act most wonderful and splendid, 
An act superb and marvelous. 
Hearing this song, the disciples all gained firm understandings. 
This is the story of Milarepa conquering demons in the Great Cave 
and singing a Drinking Song while strolling [with his disciples]. 
NOTES 
Great Conquering Demon Cave (T.T.: bDud.hDul.Phug.Mo.Che.). 
2 Water-Samlidhi: Literally this should be, "Exhaustion-of-the-Elements Water-Samlidhi" (T.T.: Zad.Par.hByun.Wa.Chuhi.Tin.ne.hDsin.). This rather enigma· 
tic term denotes a Samiidhi in which the yogi manipulates his power to "exhaust" 
or subdue all the other four elements- Earth, Fire, Wind, and Space- thus preventing their manifestation and activity, and bringing the Water Element alone 
into manifestation. It is said that a spectator will not see the yogi's physical body, 
but a vision of water when he is engaged in this Samlidhi. Likewise, the proficient 
yogi can also apply his power to manipulate the other four elements; thus we have 
the Exhaustion-of-the-Elements: Earth-, Fire·, Wind-, and Space-Samlidhis. 
3 The Triple Gem: the Three Precious Ones, i.e., Buddha, Dharma, and 
Sangha. 
1 See Note 2. 
5 The Pure White Element (T.T.: dKar.Po.Dan.Wa.): This seems to imply 
the white Tig Le -
the Essence of male semen, a symbol. of positive energy. 
' 
6 Heruka: the general name for Tantric deities, usually of a fierce form. 
7 The Six Adornments: (1) the tiara of human skulls, (2) the necklace of 
human heads, (3) the bone armlets and wristlets, (1) the anklets, (5) the breastplate Mirror-of-Karma, and (6) the cemetery-dust ointment. 

--- PAGE 596 ---
HEARTFELT ADVICE 
TO RECHUNGPA 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A T ONE time the Jetsun Milarepa was staying at Ramdin Nampu 
with his son-disciples, Rechungpa, Drigom Repa, and others. One 
day, while Rechungpa and Drigom Repa were having a long debate 
about the teachings of Naropa and Medripa, the Jetsun commented, 
"First listen to my song, then continue your discussion." 
My gracious Guru always sits upon my head, 
The Realization is always in my mind. 
Oh how can one describe this joyful feeling! 
Listen you two, one Repa and one priest, 
Who still linger in the realm of action. 
If you do not understand within, 
Your noisy bark will but inflate 
Your pride and egotism. 
Is not the clearance of misunderstandings 
Within called the "Endless View"- a yogi's glory 
Confirming reasons and the Scriptures? 
Is not Nhamdog dissolving in the Dharmakaya 
Called spontaneous practice- a yogi's glory 
Confirming meditation principles? 
Is not self-purity of the Six Senses 
Called the Action-of-One-Taste- a yogi's glory 
--- PAGE 597 ---
Heartfelt Advice to Rechungpa 
Responding freely to times and changes? 
Is not the Experience of the Bliss-Void 
Called the fruition of the Whispered LineageA yogi's glory conforming with 
The Four Initiations? 
Is not the art of brightening Siinyata 
Called the Stages and Bhiimis of the PathA yogi's glory witnessing 
The sign-posts on the Way? 
Is not the consummation of Self-mind1 
Called the attainment of Buddhahood 
In one life- a yogi's glory 
Confirming the Four Bodies? 
Is not a possessor of the Pith-Instructions 
Of Reason and the Scriptures called 
A Guru with Lineage- a yogi's glory, 
Embodiment of Love and of Compassion? 
Is not one with compassion and great faith 
Called a disciple-with-capacityA yogi's glory embodying 
The merit of veneration? 
One must observe the mind to gain a decisive 
View. To win progress one must meditate; 
One must act to reach the consummation. 
Perfection of Mind is the Accomplishment; 
The Fourfold Body of Buddha is 
A presence and Realization. 
He who knows one, knows all. 
Hearing this song, their misunderstandings were all cleared. Then 
the Jetsun told Rechungpa that if one determines to practice the 
Dharma, he should practice like this; whereupon he sang: 
Listen, my son, the Illumination-Holder. 
To practice the Dharma you should know these things: 
That your Guru who produces merit, 

--- PAGE 598 ---
The embodiment of all the Buddhas, 
Is the Dharmakaya in Itself. 
Rechungpa, are you thus convinced? 
You should know his instructions 
Are superb, nectar-like antidotes 
That cure the Five Poisonous Desires. 
Rechungpa, are you thus convinced? 
His deeds and acts are those 
Of the NirmaQakaya. 
Son, are you thus convinced? 
The mind's ever-flowing thoughts are 
Void, intrinsically groundless; 
(They seem] to rise, and yet they n'er exist. 
In unwavering mindfulness 
You should have a firm belief. 
Rechungpa, are you thus convinced? 
The pleasures that heavenly beings love 
Are subject to change and transience. 
Finnly believe that in Saqtsara 
True happiness can ne'er be found. 
Rechungpa, are you thus convinced? 
All things with form are momentary and fleeting, 
Like flowing water and incense smoke, like lightning 
In the sky. Know that leisure in this life is rare. 
Rechungpa, are you thus convinced? 
That all on earth will die is certain -
There's no escape: for Beyond-death strive. 
Rechungpa, are you thus convinced? 
Hearing this song, all the son-disciples gained further understanding. 
One day some patrons of Nya Non arrived. They invited Rechungpa to accept hospitality in their village for a time, and the Jetson gave 
him permission to sojourn there for a fortnight. Other Repas also 
went to the village for alms. 
In the meantime Tsese, Ku Ju, and other patrons from Orin came 
to visit Milarepa. When they saw him sitting there with his penis 

--- PAGE 599 ---
Heartfelt Advice to Rechungpa 
freely exposed, they were shamed and horrified, and feared to go near 
him. Finally Tsese approached and offered him a covering-cloth. Whereupon all the visitors gathered round him and said, "Oh Jetson, the 
manner in which you expose your naked body and organ makes us 
worldly men feel very embarrassed and ashamed. For our sake, please 
be compassionate and considerate enough to cover it." 
When he heard this request, Milarepa suddenly stood up naked and 
sang: 
Through wandering long in many places, 
I have forgotten my native land. 
Staying long with my Holy Jetsun, 
I have forgotten all my kinsmen. 
Keeping for long the Buddha's teaching, 
I have forgotten worldly things. 
Staying for long in hermitages, 
I have forgotten all diversions. 
Through long watching of monkeys' play, 
I have forgotten sheep and cattle. 
Long accustomed to a tinder-box, 
I have forgotten all household chores. 
Long used to solitude without servant or master, 
I have forgotten courteous manners. 
Long accustomed to be carefree, 
I have forgotten worldly shame. 
Long accustomed to the mind coming and going 
By itself, I have forgotten how to hide things. 
Long used to burning Dumo-heat, 
I have forgotten clothing. 
Long accustomed to practice non-discriminating Wisdom, 
I have forgotten all distracting thoughts. Long used 
To practicing the Two-in-One Illumination, 
I have forgotten all nonsensical ideas. 
These twelve "oblivions" are the teachings of this Yogi. 
Why, dear patrons, do you not also follow them? 
I have untied the knot of dualism; 
What need have I to follow your customs? 
To me, Bodhi is spontaneity itself! 
The Dharma of you worldly people 
Is too difficult to practice. 
Caring for nought, I live the way I please. 
Your so-called "shame" only brings deceit 

--- PAGE 600 ---
And fraud. How to pretend I know not. 
The patrons then made fine, bountiful offerings to Milarepa, and 
left. Meanwhile, Rechungpa remained in the village, and though he 
only stayed one day in each patron's house, it was many days before 
he could return to the hermitage. \Vhen he finally came back, be found 
that the door was shut. Rechungpa thought, "Was it because I stayed 
too long in the village that the Jetsun became displeased?" And he 
sang: 
In the immanence of Dharma 
There's no need to read the stars; 
Those who consult the stars 
Are far from Immanence. 
The Great Perfection2 has no dogmas; 
If an obstinate creed arises, 
It is not the Great Perfection. 
In the Mahamudra there is no 
Acceptance or rejection. If there 
Be, it is not the Great Symbol. 
In the Experience of Great Bliss 
There is neither light nor shade. 
If either of the two arises, 
It is not Great Bliss. 
The great Middle Way cannot be described; 
Nor can it be defined, for if it could, 
It would not be the Middle Way. 
I, Rechungpa, have just returned; 
Are you, my Father well today? 
From over the top of the door Milarepa sang in reply this song: 
There is no Buddha other than one's mind; there is 
No faster Way than Pral)a and Nac;li practice; 
There is no cruelty or vengeance in the Three 
Refuges; 
There is no experience greater than that of the 
Bliss-Void; 

--- PAGE 601 ---
Heartfelt Advice to Rechungpa 
No grace is higher than the Jetsun Guru'sThe refuge and glory of all men. 
By practicing the correct instructions 
Conviction will grow in one's mind. 
With complete Realization, 
Those instructions are fulfilled. 
Once a firm resolution has been made, 
Experience and conviction blossom. 
When in one's heart kindness grows, 
One through love can help all others. 
He who sees his Guru as the Buddha, 
Will then receive the great blessing power. 
Rechungpa, the quotations 
You have made are excellent. 
If you understand them, 
You will find the Dharma 
There. If not, your remarks 
Are babble and jabber. 
How have you been, my son Rechungpa? 
Your old father is well and healthy. 
The Jetsun then opened the door and Rechungpa went in. Milarepa said, "We will take a rest today, and have a talk. I see now that 
you still have great desires for worldly things. You should renounce 
them and meditate alone in the mountains. Now listen": 
Through my Guru's grace I have been 
Able to stay·in the mountains. 
Pray enable me e'er to remain in solitude. 
Listen attentively, well-gifted Rechungpa. 
When you dwell in solitude, 
Think not of whispered accusations 
Lest you stir your mind with anger. 
When you meditate with your Guru, 
Think not of religious affairs 
Lest you fall into confusion. 
When you give Dormasil to spirits, 
Expect not assistance from them 
Lest you, yourself, become a demon! 

--- PAGE 602 ---
When engrossed in meditation, 
Meet no friend or companion 
Lest they interfere with your devotions. 
When ascetically you persevere, 
Think not of meat and wine lest 
You be born a hungry ghost. 
When you practice the Whispered Successions' 
Skillful Path, yearn not for learning 
Lest to the wrong path you stray. 
When in the hills you dwell alone, 
Think not of leaving lest 
Evil thoughts arise. 
My son, it is through perseverance 
That the Holy Dharma is attained. 
It is through hard work that the pains 
Of Saq:~sara are relieved. 
My son, my vowed disciple, 
Let your father help you to bring 
Forth the true Enlightenment! 
Let me help you to the Last Realization 
That the Dharmakaya and all forms are one! 
His song struck [to the root of] Rechungpa's hidden faults. Whereupon Rechungpa prostrated himself before the Jetsun and sang: 
I have through your blessing 
The chance to practice Dharma. 
When for good I left my parents, 
Your grace was written in my heart. 
Though long ago I left my home, 
I still long for companionship, 
Thinking of food, and dress, and wealth. 
An ascetic, I have lived and dwelt in caves, 
Far from temptations in the world. 
Yet the thought of gathering 
And gaining still rises in my mind. 
What I now see is the accomplished being, 
What I possess are the Whispered PithInstructions. I have meditated long and hard, 
Yet I still think of seeing other Gurus 

--- PAGE 603 ---
Heartfelt Advice to Rechungpa 
To learn more teachings from them. 
I have tried to serve my Guru, 
I have strived to reach 
Buddhahood in this life, 
I have stayed in lonely places, 
Yet I still think of doing this and that. 
My Jetsun Guru, the Immutable Essence, 
Dorje-Chang, pray help, bless, and convert your son! 
Milarepa then gave Rechungpa many verbal instructions, and as a 
result he made great progress. After this incident, the patrons of Nya 
Non invited Milarepa and his son to dwell in the Belly Cave. 
This is the story of Ramdin Nampu. 
NOTES 
1 The text reads: "Raft.Sems.Zad.Sar.sKyol.Wa.La." More literally, "Is not the 
exhaustion of Self-mind called the attainment of Buddhahood .. . ?" Mahayana 
Buddhism holds that the phenomena of exhaustion and of consummation seem to 
be always inseparable; exhaustion of something, such as the desires and ignorance, 
implies the simultaneous consummation of something else, such as transcendental 
Wisdom and Compassion. The "exhaustion of Self-mind" here seems to be used in a 
more positive, rather than in a negative sense. 
2 The Great Perfection (T.T.: rDsogs.Pa.Chen.Po.; Skt.: Mahiisampanna): 
This is the "teaching-on-the-mind" of the Ningmaba School, or the Ningmaba's version of the Mahlimudra teaching. Mahlimudra, Mahasampanna, and Ch'an 
Buddhism are all one teaching under different names. 
3 Dormas: See Story 30 Note 7. 

--- PAGE 604 ---
RECHUNGPA'S 
JOURNEY TO WEU 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
B 
Y THE invitation of his patrons in Nya Non, who provided perfect food and service, Jetsun Milarepa dwelt in the Belly Cave, 
while Rechungpa stayed in another cave above it. At one time the 
Gurus, patron Buddhas, and Oakinis all revealed themselves to Rechungpa in his dreams, persuading him to ask the Jetsun to relate his 
life story. After Milarepa had done so, Rechungpa yearned to go to 
Central Tibet [Weu]. 
At that time some patrons said, "Compare the father [Milarepa] 
with the son [Rechungpa]; the son seems to be far superior because 
he has been in India." Then the younger people all went to Rechungpa, while the older ones came to the Jetsun. One day many patrons 
arrived. They brought Rechungpa fine and bountiful food, but gave 
Milarepa only meager offerings. [Not knowing this], Rechungpa 
thought, "Since they have brought me such good food, they must have 
made even better offerings to the Jetsun." He went to Milarepa and 
said, "Dear Jetsun, haven't we received fine offerings today? With all 
this food we can hold a sacramental feast with all the Repas. Shall we 
do so?" 
"Very well," replied Milarepa, "you will find my share under that 
slab of stone. Take and use·it." But Rechungpa found only a portion 
of rotten meat, a bottle of sour beer, and a small quantity of barley 
flour. On his way back, Rechungpa thought, "Is this fitting of those 
patrons? Compared with my Buddha-like Guru, I am nothing. I cannot match a single hair of his head, even with my whole body. But 
now these ignorant patrons are doing this foolish thing. Hitherto I 
have been living with my Guru and receiving all the Instructions from 
him. My intention was to go on living with him so that I could serve 
and please him. But as things stand now, if I stay with him too long 
--- PAGE 605 ---
Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
I will only become a hindrance and stand in his way. Thus, instead 
of being a helper I will become a competitor. I ought to ask his permission to leave." 
Very early next morning, Rechungpa went to see the Jetsun. He 
noticed that Milarepa was sleeping with his head hidden [under his 
arms, like a bird]. Megom Repa was also asleep in his bed. Rechungpa thought, "Concerning self-achievement, my Guru has completely 
realized the Dharmakaya. And as to altruism, does he not at times 
practice it like a bird?" Knowing what Rechurtgpa was thinking, the 
Jetsun sang a song called "The Four Activities": 
Listen with care, my son Rechungpa! 
Your old father, Mila, sometimes sleeps, 
But in sleeping he also practices, 
For he knows how to illumine Blindness; 
But not all men know this Instruction. 
I shall be happy if all can share this teaching. 
Your old father, Mila, sometimes eats, 
But in eating he also practices, 
For he knows how to identify 
His food and drink with the Holy Feast; 
But not all men know this Instruction. 
I shall be happy if all can share this teaching. 
Sometimes your old father, Mila, walks, 
But in marching he also practices, 
For he knows that walking 
Is to circle round the Buddhas; 
But not all men know this Instruction. 
I shall be happy if all can share this teaching. 
Rechungpa, you should also practice in this way. 
Get up, Megom, it is time to make some broth! 
In asking the Jetsun's permission to leave, Rechungpa gave many 
reasons for going toW eu. At the end of his petition, he sang: 
To visit different places 
And journey to various lands, 
To circumambulate holy Lhasa, 
See the two divine faces of Jo Shag,1 
Visit the saintly Samye Temple, 

--- PAGE 606 ---
Circle round the Yuru Kradrag, 
Visit the seat of Marngo, 
"Sightsee" at Nyal and Loro, 
And to beg for alms, 
I must go to Weu. 
Milarepa replied, "My son, although you will have disciples in Weu, 
the time has not yet come for you to go there. Please do not go 
against your Guru's injunctions, but listen to this song": 
Born for the Supreme and Skillful Path of Secret 
Words,2 
· He is the Jetsun Buddha disguised in human form, 
Possessing the divine Four Bodies, 
The embodiment of Blisses Four. 
To Him, the great Marpa, 
I pay sincerest homage. 
On this early morning 
Of the auspicious eighth, 
The dawning sun, like a crystal ball of fire, 
Radiates its warm and brilliant beams. 
I, the Yogi, feel very well and happy. 
Son Rechungpa, as people have well said, 
You are the spear-holder 
Of a hundred soldiers. 
Please do not talk like this, 
But control your mind. 
Try to cleanse it as a mirror bright. 
And lend your ear to this old man. 
When you live in a quiet hermitage, 
Why think about staying in other lands? 
Since you meditate on your Buddha Guru, 
Why need you circle Lhasa? 
While you watch your mind at play, 
Why need you see Samye Temple? 
If you have annihilated doubts within, 
Why need you visit Marngo? 
Since you practice the Whispered Lineage teaching, 
Why need you "sightsee" at Loro and Nyal? 
If you observe with penetration your Self-mind, 

--- PAGE 607 ---
Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
Why need you circumambulate the Kradrag? 
But Rechungpa still kept on pressing his request. Whereupon the 
Jetsun sang: 
It is good for you, the white lion on the mountain, 
To stay high, and never go deep into the valley, 
Lest your beautiful mane be sullied! 
To keep it in good order, 
You should remain on the high'snow mountain. 
Rechungpa, hearken to my words today) 
It is good for you, the great 
Eagle on high rocks to perch, 
And never fall into a pit, 
Lest your mighty wings be damaged! 
To keep them in good order, 
You should remain in the high hills. 
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru's words. 
It is good for you, the jungle tiger, 
To stay in the deep forest; 
If you rove about the plain 
You will lose your dignity. 
To keep your splendor in perfection, 
In the forest you should remain. 
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru's words. 
It is good for you, the golden-eyed 
Fish to swim in the central sea; 
If you swim too close to shore; 
You will in a net be caught. 
You should remain in the deep waters. 
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru's words. 
It is good, Rechungdordra of Gung Tang, 
For you to stay in hermitages; 
If you wander in different places, 
Your Experience and Realization will dim. 
To protect and cultivate devotion 
You should remain in the mountains. 
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru's words! 

--- PAGE 608 ---
"Dear Guru, if I stay too long with you, I shall become a hindrance 
rather than a help," countered Rechungpa. "It is also for the sake of 
furthering my Experience and Realization that I want to go to different countries!" And he sang: 
~Hear me, my Father Jetsun! 
If I, the white lion on the snow 
Mountain, do not rise up and act, 
How can I glorify my splendid mane? 
Rechungpa wants not to remain, but to visit Weu. 
I beg your permission to depart today. 
If I, the great eagle, king of birds, 
Do not fly high into the firmament, 
How can I magnify my mighty wings? 
Rechungpa wants not to remain, but to visit Weu. 
I beg my Guru's permission to depart today! 
If I, the great tiger, the jungle lord, 
Do not rove in the deep forest, 
How can I better my grand smile? 
Rechungpa wants not to remain, but to visit Weu. 
I beg your permission to depart today! 
If I, the fish in the deep ocean, 
Swim not to the ocean's edge, 
I can never sharpen my golden eyes. 
Rechungpa wants not to remain, but to visit Weu. 
I beg my Guru's permission to depart today! 
If I, Rechungdordra of Gung Tang, 
Travel not to different countries, 
I can ne'er improve my Experience and Realization. 
Rechungpa wants not to remain, but to visit Weu. 
I beg your permission to depart today! 
The Jetsun then said, "Rechungpa! Before you have reached the 
Ultimate Realization, it would be far better for you to stay with me 
and not go away. Now listen to this song": 
Listen, Rechung Dorjedrapa, 
The well-learned Buddhist scholar. 
Listen, and think with care on what I say. 

--- PAGE 609 ---
Rechungpa' s Journey to Weu 
Before faith and yearning arise for Dharma, 
Beg not alms for mere enjoyment. 
Before you have; realized primordial 
Truth, boast not of your sublime philosophy. 
Before you have fully mastered the Awareness 
Within, engage not in blind and foolish acts. 
Before you can feed on the Instructions, 
Involve not yourself in wicked occultism. 
Before you can explain the profound Teaching, 
Be not beguiled by partial knowledge. 
Before you can increase your merits, 
Dispute not over others' goods. 
Before you can destroy your inner cravings, 
Treat not charity as if it were your right. 
Before you can stop projecting habitual thoughts, 
Guess not when you make predictions. 
Before you have gained Supreme Enlightenment, 
Assume not that you are a venerable Lama. 
Before you can master all virtues and practices, 
Consider not leaving your Guru. 
Son Rechungpa, it is better not to go, but stay! 
[In spite of the Jetsun's attempted dissuasion], Rechungpa was 
still bent on going. Milarepa then said, "It seems that you will not 
take my advice, but have made up your mind to leave. Well, although once I promised our patrons not to let you go to Weu, and 
swore to it, all oaths are like phantoms and dreams. So I will now 
grant your request and let you go. You may make your preparations 
at once." 
Rechungpa was so delighted that he almost cried. He then stayed 
with the Jetsun for a few more days to learn more Pith-Instructions 
and to copy some scriptures. 
At the time of his departure, Rechungpa dressed very simply in a 
cotton robe. He put the Ahru [drug?] of Bhamen and the trident on 
his back, put the Scripture of the Whispered Succession under his arm, 
and came to the Jetsun for his farewell blessing. 
Milarepa thought, "Rechungpa has lived with me for such a long 
time! After this separation we may never meet again." [With this 
thought in his mind] he escorted Rechungpa for a distance. When 
they came to the crest of a hill, he asked, "How will you walk on 
your way?" Rechungpa sang in answer: 
Using the Dharma View as a simile, 

--- PAGE 610 ---
I walk forward in the Manifestation-Void. 
With no thought of Nihilism or Realism, I walk ahead; 
Following the immutable Path, I walk straight on. 
Though my understanding may be poor, I have no regret. 
Using the Dharma Practice as a simile, 
I march forward in the Bliss-Illumination, 
Neither drowsy nor distracted, I march ahead; 
Following the Path of Light, I march straight on. 
Though my practice may be poor, I have no regret. 
Using the Dharma Action as a simile, 
I walk forward in the Discipline. 
Without foolish talk, I walk ahead; 
Following the Path of Non-clinging, I walk straight on. 
Though my action may be poor, I have no regret. 
Using the Dharma of Samaya as a simile, 
I walk forward in Purity. Without 
Hypocrisy and circumvention, I walk ahead; 
In the Path of Straightforwardness, I walk straight on. 
Though my discipline may be poor, I have no regret. 
Using the Accomplishment of Dharma as a simile, 
I march forward in Immanence. 
Without fear and hope, I march ahead; 
In the Path of the Four Bodies, I march straight on. 
Though my accomplishment may be small, I have no regret. 
Using the Jetsun Marpa as a simile, 
I walk forward in the Whispered Lineage. 
Without talk and words, I walk ahead; following 
The Path of Pith-Instruction, I walk straight on. 
Though my spiritual provision is meager, I have 
no regret. 
Using my Guru Milarepa as a simile, 
I march forward in Fortitude. Without 
Laziness and sloth, I march ahead; 
In the Path of Diligence, I march straight on. 
Though my perseverance may be small, I have no regret. 
Using myself, Rechungpa, as a simile, 

--- PAGE 611 ---
Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
I walk forward in the way of the Gifted Ones. 
Without deviation and wrong thoughts, I walk ahead; 
In the Path of Veneration, I walk straight on. 
Though my prayer may be feeble, I have no regret. 
"Your understanding is very good," Milarepa replied, "But you 
should know that a child grows better with its mother, an egg ripens 
quicker in a warm place, and a yogi will never go astray if he lives 
with his Guru. Now you will not listen to my advice but insist upon 
going away. With my pity and love I will never forsake you. You 
should also pray constantly to me." 
When Rechungpa heard these words, he shed many tears. Then he 
said, "I shall never, at any time, lose the faith and conviction that 
my Jetsun is Buddha Himself; so far, r have had no other Guru but 
you; hereafter, before I attain perfect Buddhahood, I will look to no 
other Guru. In the state of Bardo after this life, please also protect 
and escort me." Whereupon he sang: 
Pray, my Buddha Guru, the e'er compassionate one, 
Pray escort your son, Rechungpa! 
When I climb the mountain of the View, 
I see the traps of Realism and Nihilism, 
The bandits of bigotry in ambush, 
And the "twin roads" steep and perilous. 
Pray, my Father Guru, Buddha's NirmaQakaya, 
Pray escort and protect me 
Until I reach Perfection's Road. 
When I climb the mountain of Practice, I see 
The snares of drowsiness and distraction, 
The perilous passage of constraint,3 
And the danger of misleading, wandering thoughts. 
Pray, my Father Guru, Buddha's NirmaQakaya, 
Pray escort and protect me 
Until I reach Non-being's Plain. 
When I climb the mountain of Action, 
I see my old companion, desire, 
Debauchery's perilous path, 
And the strong robber, frivolity. 
Pray, my Father Guru, Buddha's NirmaQakaya, 
Pray escort and protect me until I reach 

--- PAGE 612 ---
The pass of Freedom and Spontaneity! 
When I build the Castle of Samaya, 
I see my knowledge is insufficient, 
That my assistant is incompetent, 
And that great are the dangers of discordance. 
Pray, my Father Guru, the Buddha's NirmaQakaya, 
Pray escort and protect me until I reach 
The pure base of Non-existence! 
When I reflect on the Accomplishment, 
I can see the long road of Sa111sara, 
The perilous passage to NirvaQa, 
And the savage bandits of hope and fear. 
Pray, my Father Guru, the Buddha's NirmaQakaya, 
Pray escort and protect me until 
I reach the home of the Four Bodies. 
Great is Rechungpa's wish for travel, 
Great his desire for pleasure and for comfort. 
People in Tibet are impious; 
The thief of hypocrisy 
Is ready now to act. 
Pray, my Father Guru, Buddha's NirmaQakaya, 
Pray escort and protect me until 
I return home from my journey! 
"For your auspicious and successful trip," said the Jetsun, "I shall 
sing you in farewell": 
Do you know what my Transmission 
Is? It is not bad, but good; 
It is the Transmission of Dorje-Chang. 
May it bring good fortune and success! 
May my son Rechungpa be blessed with [good] luck. 
Do you know who my Patron Buddha 
Is? She is not bad, but good; 
She is the holy Dorje Paumo. 
May she bring good fortune and success! 
May my son Rechungpa be blessed with [good] luck. 
Do you know who are my Guards? 

--- PAGE 613 ---
Rechungpa' s Journey to W eu 
They are not bad, but good. They are 
The Ma Goun Brothers and Sisters. 
May they bring good fortune and success! 
May my son Rechungpa be blessed with [good] luck. 
May the View, the Practice, and the Action 
All bless you, my son Rechungpa! 
May the Principle, the Path, and the Accomplishment 
All bless you, my son Rechungpa! 
May the Tsa, the Lun, and the Tig Le' 
All bless you, my son Rechungpa! 
May the Bliss, the Illumination, and Non-thought 
All bless you, my son Rechungpa! 
Most true is the Buddha, most true 
The Dharma and the Sangha. 
May these three Gems bless you 
Forever, my son Rechungpal 
Do you know who I am? 
I am called Milarepa. 
May all Mila's blessings fall upon his son, 
May Rechungpa soon exceed his father. 
The Jetsun continued, "In Central Tibet [Weu] a bitch will 'catch' 
your feet. At that time do not forget your Guru and your medita. 
tion." 
Rechungpa circled and prostrated before the Jetsun many times, 
and then set out on his journey. In the meantime, Milarepa thought, 
"Rechungpa will probably look back at me. If I do not stay here1 he 
will be very disappointed when he finds me gone. I had better remain 
for a while." So he sat down, but Rechungpa never turned his head. 
Milarepa wondered, "Why does he not look back? Does he have any 
wrong ideas about his Guru and his brothers? At any rate, he is a 
man who can keep the Dharma and the Succession secret wherever 
he goes." Then, holding his breath, Milarepa [flew ahead] and overtaking Rechungpa, transformed himself into seven identical Repas 
standing before a huge rock shaped like a rearing lion. In order to test 
Rechungpa's intention, the seven Repas all sang together: 
Listen, Repa traveler! Who 
Are you and who is your Guru? 
Who are your forebears, what 

--- PAGE 614 ---
Instructions do you know? 
Which is your Transmission, what 
Meditation do you practice? 
Where'syour temple, what's this mountain? 
Can you name this rock? 
Whither are you bound, 
By who's order do you travel, 
And in what way do you go? 
Rechungpa thought, "No other Repa would say things like this to 
me; they must be the transformations of the Jetsun." He then prostrated himself before the Repas and sang: 
Hear me, my great Jetsun Father! 
You ask who I am. My name 
Is Rechungpa from Gung Tang; 
My Guru is Milarepa, 
My forebears, Marpa and Ngopa,8 
My great-grandfathers, Tilopa and Naropa, 
My Instructions are of the Oakinis' Whispered 
Lineage, 
My Transmission was founded by Dorje-Chang, 
My hermitage is on Lashi Snow Mountain. 
This hill is Biling Zurkha, this rock 
Is known as the Great Rearing Lion, 
The place to which I go is Weu, 
My Jetsun Guru gave me leave. 
This is the story of my journey. 
I pray you, Jetsun, for instructions. 
Milarepa then withdrew all the transformation bodies into the real 
one and said, "I did this to find out why you did not even look back 
at me after you left. Now I know that you have not violated the 
.Samaya precepts. Since you have observed them properly, we will 
never separate from each other. You may now proceed to Weu." 
Overjoyed at these words, Rechungpa bowed down at the Jetsun's 
feet and made many good wishes. Then he set out for Weu, and the 
Jetsun returned to the Belly Cave. 
That day, some patrons came with food and offerings. But as soon 
as they learned that Rechungpa had left, they hid all the things they 
had brought for him in a brass basin in the recesses of a cave. Then 
they came to Milarepa's abode and found that he was already up. 

--- PAGE 615 ---
Rechungpa's foumey to Weu 
They asked, "Revered Jetsun, usually you do not get up so early. 
What made you do so today?" Milarepa replied, "Rechungpa left for 
Weu this morning, and I went down to the plain to see him off. 
Upon my return I felt a little sad, and I have been sitting here ever 
since." 
"Did you, Revered Jetsun, ever try to stop him from going to Weu?" 
"Yes, I did." Whereupon Milarepa sang: 
Rechungpa, my beloved son, has left 
For W eu. He never follows the advice 
Of others but acts as he wishes. 
He said that he would visit Marpa 
And Ngopa's temple, see Lora, 
Nyal, and the Samye Chapel, 
And circle the holy Lhasa. 
I advised him thus: 
"When you put all your trust in your Guru, 
What is the need for Jowo Shagja?8 
When you meditate in a solitary retreat, 
Why go to see Marpa and Ngopa's temple? 
When you have learned the Whispered Lineage's 
Instruction, why visit Lora and Nyal? 
When you can amuse yourself by watching 
The play of your own Dharmakaya Mind, 
What need have you to see Samye Chapel? 
When you have destroyed all your wrong ideas, 
What need have you to circle Lhasa? 
I repeat, Rechungpa 
Our beloved, has gone to \Veu. 
Had you, good patrons, then been here 
You might by circling round have stopped him. 
"When a Guru grows old," said the patrons, "it is the primary duty 
of his disciple to attend him. Your Reverence has gone to every 
length to dissuade him, but still he would not listen. He is indeed 
shameless, with little consideration for other people." Milarepa replied 
pretendingly, "Yes, Rechungpa had no shame and no discipline." Then 
he sang: 
A son fostered, loved, and cherished 
Seldom cares for his old parents. 

--- PAGE 616 ---
Out of a hundred men 'tis hard 
To find an exception. 
An undisciplined disciple seldom 
Helps his Guru when he grows old. 
Out of a hundred men 'tis hard 
To find an exception. 
A lion white, he went to \Veu; I was left 
Behind abandoned like an old dog. 
Yes, my son has left me for W eu. 
Like a young tiger who forsakes 
The fox, he went to W eu. 
Yes, he has left his old father and gone to Weu. 
Like a great vulture who forsakes 
A cock, he went to Weu. 
As a superb steed of Dochin 
Leaves the asses from J ungron, 
My son has left his old father and gone to Weul 
Like a wild and blue-horned yak 
Deserting an elephant, 
My son has left his old father and gone to Weu. 
With body handsomer than a Deva's, 
He went to Weu. 
With voice mellower than an angel's 
He went to Weu. 
With words sweeter than all music, 
He went to Weu. 
With mind brighter than embroidery, 
He went to Weu. 
Smelling more fragrant than (good] incense, 
He went to Weul 
The patrons then said, "Revered Jetsun, you are indeed most compassionate toward him. On such a long, hard journey you must have 
provided a companion for him and made all necessary preparations 
for his trip. Please tell us all about it." In answer, Milarepa sang: 
He was well escorted when he went. 

--- PAGE 617 ---
Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
In time friends are always separated, 
But Rechungpa's friend will never leave him; 
She is self-arising Wisdom. My son 
Rechungpa left with a fine friend. 
Even good horses sometimes stumble, 
But Rechungpa's will ne'er miss a step. 
Riding the steed of PraQa-Mind, 
Riding on it, he set out for Weu. 
Clothes at times are warm, at others cold, 
But what Rechungpa wears is always warm, 
For it is the blazing Dumo. Wearing 
This superb dress, he left for W eu. 
Food is sometimes good, and sometimes nasty, 
But what Rechungpa eats is tasty at all times, 
For it is the savory dish of Samadhi. 
With this fine food, he has gone to Weu. 
Jewels are the aim of thieves, 
But Rechungpa's gems can ne'er be stolen, 
For they are the wish-fulfilling Instructions of 
the Whispered Lineage. 
With these precious jewels, he has left for Weu. 
While singing this song, Milarepa appeared a little sad. The patrons 
said, "Since Rechungpa has left you without showing the slightest 
affection, you, Jetson, should also forget about him. Besides, Shiwa 
Aui, Sevan Repa, and many other disciples are still here. They can attend you just as well." ''Yes," replied the Jetson, "there are many Repas, 
but one like Rechungpa is hard to find. There may be many patrons, 
but it is difficult to find one with true faith. Please listen to my song": 
The Nyan Chung Repa of Gung Tang, 
The Ngan Tson Dewa Shun of Jenlun, 
The Sevan Jashi Bar of Dodra, 
And the Drigom Linkawa of Dhamo -
These are the four sons 
I cherish as my heart. 
Of them Rechung, my long-time 
Companion is most dear.7 
I think of him and miss him much now he has gone. 

--- PAGE 618 ---
The word-conditioned "View" is nominal. 
Though people call it "View," 
'Tis but a word. 
It is most hard to find a man who can 
Cease to be distracted by Duality; 
It is most hard to find a man who can 
Absorb himself in the sole Realization! 
The "Practice" that cannot widen 
The mind is nominal. 
Though people call it "Practice," 
'Tis but a form of Dhylina.8 
It is most hard to find a man 
Who can merge both Dhyana and "Insight"; 
It is most hard to find a man who knows 
How to work on the vital point of mind. 
When the mind's "Action" is now dark, 
Now light, it is but nominal. 
Though people call it "Action," 
'Tis a deed of involvement. 
It is most hard to find a man 
Who can conquer worldly desires; 
It is very hard to find a man 
Who can complete the Dharma practice. 
Observance of discipline when feigned 
And artificial is but nominal. 
Though people call it "Discipline," 
'Tis nought but mockery. 
It is most hard to find a man 
Who never violates his oath; 
It is very hard to find 
An honest witness of his mind. 
"Accomplishment" when longed for hard 
Is a notion [cherished by fools]. 
Though people call it "Accomplishment," 
'Tis nothing but delusion. 
It is most difficult to find a man 
Who can plumb the abyss of Reality; 
It is most hard to find a man 
Who on the real Path can stay. 

--- PAGE 619 ---
Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
The Pith-Instructions may seem 
Most profound on paper; 
They are but written words. 
It is difficult to find a man 
With diligence and perseverance; 
It is most hard to find a man 
With direct teachings from a Lineage. 
The Gurus who involve themselves 
In worldly life are nominal; 
They only bring entanglements. 
Small are Pe<?ple's faith and veneration. 
It is most difficult to find a man 
Ever relying on an accomplished Guru. 
The merits of ostentatious faith 
And veneration are nominal, 
For they change and are short-lived. 
Where Karma's bad prejudice is strong, 
It is hard to find a man 
Who fears and cares for nothing. 
It is most hard to find a man 
With the Three Determinations.' 
The small temple on the outskirts 
Of a town is but nominal. 
Though people call it "Temple," 
It is really part of "town." 
Always there is great craving for 
Amusement and distraction. 
It is most hard to find a man 
Staying long in hermitages. 
The head of a restrained young monk 
Is stiff and hard like stone. 
Though people call him "disciplined," 
He is but acting in a play. 
It is hard to find a man with perseverance, 
It is hard to find another 
Observing the strict priestly rules. 
The handsome belles of Nya Non 
As patrons are but nominal, 
--- PAGE 620 ---
For they are deceivers and seducers. 
Poor and low is woman's comprehension. 
Hard indeed is it to find a patron 
To serve one and make all the offerings. 
The faiths of evil-doers are in their mouths; 
The faiths of you patrons are in your private parts. 
I, the Yogi, in my heart have faith. 
When a rock grows old 
Grime encrusts its face; 
When a stream grows old 
Wrinkles cover its bed. 
When a tree grows old 
Its leaves soon fall off. 
When a hermitage grows old 
Water and plantains disappear. 
When a yogi ages, his Experience 
And his Realization dimmer grow. 
When patrons grow old 
Their faith soon wears out. 
Some patrons are like peacocks 
Who pretend and swagger. 
Some patrons are like parrots 
Gossiping and gabbling. 
Some patrons are like cows -
They think you a calf or goat. 
My patrons, it is getting late, 
It is time for you to go. 
Besides, in the cave beneath, 
The sack of flour in the bowl 
By mice is being nibbled; 
The cake of butter has been tossed 
And is now rolling on the ground; 
The vixen has upset the wine, 
The crows have scattered all the meat, 
So run fast and hurry [home]. 
Patrons I will vow to see you soon. 
In a happy mood you may leave me now. 
The visiting patrons were nonplused. They looked at one another 

--- PAGE 621 ---
Rechungpa' s Journey to W eu 
timidly, and nudged each others' elbows. Too filled with shame to say 
a word, they all went home. As the Jetsun had unmistakably exposed 
the truth, they felt guilt and deep regret; but also, as a result, their 
faith in him was firmly established. 
One day they came again and brought excessive offerings, saying, 
"Please sing for us to awaken our insight into the transiency of beings." Milarepa would not accept their offerings, but he sang this for 
them: 
Hearken, you mean patrons! 
For the sake of fame to do 
Meritorious deeds -
For this life's sake to seek 
The protection of Buddha -
To give alms for the sake 
Of returns and dividends -
To serve and offer for the sake 
Of vanity and prideThese four ways will ne'er requite one. 
For the sake of gluttony 
To hold a sacramental feastFor the sake of egotism 
To strive for Sutra learning -
For distraction and amusement 
To indulge in foolish talk and song -
For vainglory's sake to give 
The InitiationsThese four ways will never bring one Blessings! 
If for love of preaching one expounds 
Without the backing of Scripture; 
If through self-conceit, 
One accepts obeisance; 
If like a bungling, fumbling fool one teaches, 
Not knowing the disciple's capacity; 
If to gather money one behaves 
Like a Dharma practicerThese four ways can never help the welfare of 
sentient beings! 
To prefer diversions to solitude, 
To love pleasures and hate hardship, 

--- PAGE 622 ---
To crave for talk when urged to meditate, 
To wallow arrogantly in the world -
These four ways will ne'er bring one to Liberation! 
This is the song of Fourfold Warning. 
Dear patrons, bear it in your minds! 
Drigom Repa, who was present, besought the Jetsun to preach still 
more of the Dharma. In response, Milarepa sang: 
The long-lived heavenly beings above 
Are hostile to Awareness when arising. 
They are ever eager for Dhyana of No-thought. 
The hungry ghosts beneath, not knowing 
That they are hunted by the mind's projections, 
Resent their pillagers with jealousy and avarice. 
Because of their evil Karma, 
They are pressed by thirst and hunger. 
In between are we poor miserable humans. 
Not knowing the golden treasure underground, 
From our fellow men we steal and cheat. 
The more we cheat and deceive, 
The more suffering we have to bear. 
The foolish and "enterprising" patrons 
Of Nya Non acquire no merits through the Jetsun, 
But make offerings to young, handsome Repas. 
Yet remorse and shame are all their alms will bring. 
Enterprises so wrong and meaningless should cease, 
So give your services and offerings to the Buddhas! 
Their faith confirmed, the patrons all bowed down to the Jetsun 
many times and shed many tears. "Oh Revered Jetsun!" they cried, 
"We beg you to remain here permanently. From now on we will 
give our offerings and services in accordance with the teaching of 
Dharma." Milarepa replied, "I cannot stay here long, but I will bestow the blessing of long life and good health upon all of you. Also 
I will make a wish that we meet again under auspicious circumstances 
conducive to the Dharma." Then he sang: 
In the immense blue sky above 

--- PAGE 623 ---
Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
Roll on the sun and moon. Their 
Courses mark the change of time. 
Blue sky, I wish you health and fortune, 
For I, the moon-and-sun, am leaving 
To visit the Four Continents for pleasure. 
On the mountain peak is a great Rock 
Round which oft the vulture circles, 
The king of birds. Their meeting 
And their parting mark the change of time. 
Dear rock, be well and healthy, for I, 
The vulture, now will fly away 
Into the vast space for pleasure. 
May lightnings never strike you, 
May I not be caught by snares. 
Inspired by the Dharma, 
May we soon meet again 
In prosperity and boon. 
Below in the Tsang River, 
Swim fish with golden eyes; 
Their meeting and their parting 
Mark the change of time. 
Dear stream, be well and healthy, for I, the fish 
Am leaving for the Ganges for diversion. 
May irrigators never drain you, 
May fishermen ne'er net me. 
Inspired by the Dharma, 
May we soon meet again 
In prosperity and boon. 
In the fair garden blooms the Rower, Halo; 
Circling round it is the Persian bee. 
Their meeting and their parting 
Mark the change of time. 
Dear Rower, be well and healthy, for I 
Will see the Ganges' blooms for pleasure. 
May hail not beat down upon you, 
May winds blow me not away. 
Inspired by the Dharma, 
May we soon meet again 
In prosperity and boon. 
--- PAGE 624 ---
Circling round the Yogi Milarepa 
Are the faithful patrons from Nya Non; 
Their meeting and their parting 
Mark the change of time. 
Be well and healthy, dear patrons, as I 
Leave for the far mountains for diversion. 
May I, the Yogi, make good progress, 
And you, my patrons, all live long. 
Inspired by the Dharma, 
May we soon meet again 
In prosperity and boon! 
Moved by this song, some patrons became devoted followers of the 
Jetsun, and the faith of all was greatly strengthened. 
During his journey to Weu, Rechungpa came to the Buddhist Study 
Center at Sha, and was appointed a Mindrol Professor10 there. Then 
he met, and formed an attachment to a certain noblewoman, but 
through the grace of the Jetsun became ashamed of his conduct and returned to Milarepa to live with him again. The details of this episode 
are clearly given in the Biography of Rechungpa. 
This is the story of Rechungpa's journey to Weu. 
NOTES 
1 Jo Shag (T.T.: Jo.C{ak., an abbreviation of Jo.Wo.C{akya.): the holy images 
to which many Tibetans make pilgrimages. 
2 The Path of Tantra, which is full of ingenious instructions and Mantras 
or secret words. 
3 This is a free translation. The text reads: "dMigs.gTad.Sa.hPhraii.Dam.Pa. 
Dail ..... " "dMigs.gTad." literally does not mean "constraint," but "(adherently] 
facing the object," i.e., the constant pursuing of objects in the outside world by the 
consciousness. 
4 Tsa, Lun, Tig Le (T.T.: rTsa.rLuii.Thig.Le.; Skt.: Na<Ji, Pral}a, [and] Bindu), 
i.e., the nerves, the breathing, and the semen. 
5 Ngopa: Milarepa's other Guru. See W. Y. Evans-Wentz' "Tibet's Great Yogi, 
Milarepa," Chapters 5 and 6. 
6 Jowo Shagja (T.T: Jo.Wo.<;akya.): See Note I. 
7 Rechungpa was Milarepa's closest disciple, who had spent most of his lifetime living with the Jetsun. See Story 10. 

--- PAGE 625 ---
Rechungpa's Journey to Weu 
8 Dhyana is an equivalent of Samadhi. According to Buddhist tradition, it is 
but a state of mental concentration. 
9 Presumably these Three Determinations are: (1) to determine to rest one's 
mind on the Dharma, (2) to rest Dharma on povert!•, and (3) to rest poverty on 
death. 
10 Mindrol Professor (T.T.: mi<han.Po.sMin.Crol.): "sMin.Cro1." is the name 
of a monastery. 

--- PAGE 626 ---
THE MEETING WITH 
DHAMPA SANGJE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
E
ARLY one morning when the Jetsun Milarepa was staying at the 
Belly Cave of Nya Non, he had a clear vision of a l)akini with 
a lion face, who came to him and said, "Milarepa, the Dhampa Sangje 
of India is coming to Tong Lha. Are you not going to see him?" 
Milarepa thought, "There is no doubt or discomfort in my mind that 
needs dispelling. However, Dhampa Sangje is an accomplished being, 
and it would do no harm for me to see him." With this thought in 
mind, Milarepa held his breath for a [short] period and went to 
Tong Lha of Nya Non. 
In the mountain pass he met a few merchants who had just come 
from the plain below. Milarepa asked them, "Has the Dhampa Sangje 
of India arrived yet?" 
"We don't know who the Dhampa Sangje is," they replied, "but 
last night we saw an old Indian with a bluish-black face, who was 
sleeping at the inn." The Jetsun thought, "This must be he, but 
these merchants do not know." He then proceeded to the top of the 
mountain pass, from whence he saw Dhampa Sangje approaching. 
While staying overnight in the Guest House of Compassion, Dhampa Sangje, also, had been persuaded by the l)akini with the lion face 
to meet the Jetsun. As soon as Milarepa saw him, he thought, "People say that Dhampa Sangje has the Transcendental Miraculous Power. I shall now test him." He then transformed himself into a clump 
of flowers growing beside the road. Dhampa Sangje passed by the 
flowers with his eyes widely open as if he did not see them at all. 
Milarepa thought, "It seems that he does not have the Perfect Miraculous Power!" But just then Dhampa Sangje turned back. Approaching the flowers, he kicked them with his foot and said, "I ought not 
--- PAGE 627 ---
The Meeting with Dhampa Sangje 
do this -this is the transformation of Milarepa." Having spoken these 
words, he picked the flowers and addressed them: "You have been 
singing all the precious teachings that are cherished by Oakinis as their 
very lives and hearts, and so they all became angry. The flesh-eating 
J;)akinis have thus taken your heart, breath, and spirit away from you. 
Last night I met them and saw that they had carried your bleeding 
heart away (in their hands). We then ate it during our sacramental 
feast, so that you can only live until this evening. Now tell me, what 
confidence do you have in facing death?" In reply, the Jetsun suddenly arose from his transformation, and sang a song called "The Six 
Assurances on Facing Death": 
The great Liberation from Extremes 
Is like a gallant lion lying 
In the snow at ease, displaying 
Without fear its fangs. 
In this View do I, the Yogi, trust. 
Death leads to the Liberation Path! 
Death brings joy to he who holds this View! 
The stag calm and magnanimous 
Has horns of "One Taste" with many points. 
He sleeps in comfort on the plain of Bliss-Light. 
In this practice do I, the Yogi, trust. 
Death leads to the Liberation Path! 
Death brings joy to he who practices! 
The fish of Ten Virtues 
With rolling, golden eyes, 
Swims in the River of Perpetual Experience. 
In this action do I, the Yogi, trust. 
Death leads to the Liberation Path! 
Death brings joy to he who acts! 
The tigress of Self-mind Realization 
Is adorned with showy stripes. 
She is the glory of Altruism-withoutEffort, walking firmly in the woods. 
In this discipline do I, the Yogi, trust. 
Death leads to the Liberation Path! 
Death brings joy to those with Discipline! 
On the paper of forms Postive-and-Negative 

--- PAGE 628 ---
I wrote an essay with my "a waring" mind. 
In the state of Non-duality 
I watch and contemplate. 
In this Dharma do I, the Yogi, trust. 
Death leads to the Liberation Path! 
Death brings joy to those with Dharma! 
The purified quintessence of the Moving 
Energy is like a great eagle flying 
On wings of Skill and Wisdom 
To the castle of Non-being. 
In this Accomplishment do I, the Yogi, trust. 
Death leads to the Liberation Path! 
Death brings joy to the accomplished man! 
Dhampa Sangje replied, "What you have said has no reason at all. 
You cannot use things in the outer world as parables [or parallels] 
to compare with the true Realization. If you were a real yogi you 
would know this immediate Awareness in a decisive and unmistakable 
manner." [In answer to his challenge] Milarepa sang a song called 
"The Six Positive Joys of the Mind." 
In the solitary retreat 
Where Oakinis always gather, 
I contemplate the Dharma 
In great ease and joy. 
To the ego-killing Bha Wo, 
I pay my sincere homage. 
Absorbing in the Void my mind, 
I reach the Realm of Immortality, 
Where death and birth vanish of themselves. 
Happy is my mind with a decisive ViewHappy and joyful as I gain supremacy! 
Absorbing myself in the Practice-without-Practice, 
I reach the Realm of No-distraction, 
Where the Main and Ensuing Samadhis vanish of 
themselves. 
Happy is my mind with the decisive PracticeHappy and joyful as I gain supremacy! 
Living in full spontaneity and naturalness, 

--- PAGE 629 ---
The Meeting with Dhampa Sangfe 
I achieve the state of Unceasing, in which 
All forms of discipline vanish of themselves. 
Happy is my mind with the Ultimate Action -
Happy and joyful as I attain supremacy! 
Absorbing myself in the Realm of No-initiation, 
I achieve the state of No-attainment; 
All forms of Buddha's Body vanish of themselves. 
Happy is my mind with the Ultimate InitiationHappy and joyful as I attain supremacy! 
Absorbing myself in the Realm of No-discipline, 
I attain the state of No-transgression; 
All forms of Precept vanish of themselves. 
Happy is my mind with the Ultimate DisciplineHappy and joyful as I gain supremacy! 
Without hope for accomplishment 
I achieve the state of No-fear; 
Hopes and fears vanish of themselves. 
Happy is my mind with the Ultimate AccomplishmentHappy and joyful as I gain supremacy! 
Dhampa Sangje commented, "1, also, have gone through all you 
have just said. A Buddhist who needs no more practice or improvement has now been found in Tibet! It is very difficult, even in India, 
to find one or two advanced Buddhists comparable to you. I do not 
need you, and you do not need me." 
Having said these words in a pleasant manner, he turned and was 
about to go away. Milarepa immediately caught hold of his robe, saying, "It is said that you have a teaching called 'Relieving all Sorrows,' 1 and that in practicing it one reverses his mind inwardly, thus 
instantaneously realizing the Buddha's Mind. Now please explain it to 
me in a song." Dhampa Sangje replied, "So far, no one lias ever heard 
me sing, and no one will." However, the Jetsun asked him so persistently that finally Dhampa Sangje sang: 
This is the Dharma called "Relieving All Sorrows": 
When demons come to harm you is the time 
To apply your Occult Powers. 
When pain and sickness strike you is the time 
To merge them with your intrinsic Awareness. 

--- PAGE 630 ---
Whenever subtle Nhamdogs rise 
It is time to stir the passions 
And transcend them. 
When lying in a hidden place alone, 
Is the time to rest one's naked Awareness. 
When mingling with many people, 
It is time to bring all to the 
View. When comes drowsiness 
It is time to use the bi:ja Pai.2 
When distracting thoughts arise, 
It is time to lead them to the Real. 
When the mind runs after worldly things; 
'Tis time to observe the truth of Suchness. 
In short, this teaching of Relieving Sorrows 
Turns all adversities into good fortune. 
Whatever wild thoughts rise, you feel but joy. 
Whenever illness comes, you use it as your aid; 
Whatever you encounter, you feel but happiness. 
Whene'er death comes, you utilize it for the Path. 
This teaching of Relieving Sorrows is the Dharma 
Of all Buddhas in the Three TimesIt is the instruction given by Dorje-Chang, 
The life and heart of all Oakinls in the Four 
Divisions;3 
It is the pith of the Tantras Four,• 
The quintessential Dharma of the Whispered Lineage, 
The key of all Essential Teachings! 
Such is the teaching of "Relieving All Sorrows"! 
Milarepa listened to this song with great delig_ht as he sat to one 
side with his penis freely exposed. Dhampa Sangje remarked, "You 
are like a lunatic who neglects to cover up the place that should be 
covered." In reply, the Jetsun sang "The Song of a Lunatic": 
To all Gurus I pay my homage. 
I take refuge in the Gracious One, 
I pray you, dispel my hindrances; 
Bring me to the right Path, I pray. 
Men say, "Is not Milarepa mad?" 

--- PAGE 631 ---
The Meeting with Dhampa Sangje 
I also think it may be so. 
Now listen to my madness. 
The father and the son are mad, 
And so are the Transmission 
And Dorje-Chang's Succession. 
Mad too were my Great-grandfather, the Fair Sage, 
Tilopa,11 
And my Grandfather, Naropa the great scholar. 
Mad, too, was my Father, Marpa the Translator; 
So too is Milarepa. 
The demon of the intrinsic Bodies Four 
Makes Dorje-Chang's Succession crazy; 
The devil of the Mahamudra made 
My Great-grandfather Tilopa crazy; 
The demon of the secret Awareness 
Made my Grandfather Naropa crazy; 
The devil of the Tantras Four 
Made my Father Marpa mad; 
The demons of Mind and Pra:Qa 
Have driven me, Milarepa, Iliad. 
The impartial Understanding itself is crazy; 
So are the free, self-liberating Actions, 
The self-illuminating Practice of No-perception, 
The Accomplishment-without-Hope-and-Fear, 
And Discipline-without-Pretension. 
Not only am I mad myself, 
I madly afflict the demons. 
With the Gurus' Pith-Instruction 
I punish all male demons; 
With the blessing of Oakinis 
I harrow female demons; 
With the he-devil of Happy Mind 
I enter the Ultimate; 
With the she-devil of Instantaneous 
Realization I perform all acts. 
Not only do I punish demons, 
I also suffer pains and sickness -
The Great Symbol hurts my back, 
--- PAGE 632 ---
The Great Perfection afflicts my chest. 
In practicing the Vase-breathing, 
I catch all kinds of sicknessThe fever of Wisdom attacks me from above, 
The cold of Samadhi invades me from below, 
The cold-fever of the Bliss-Void assails me in 
the middle. 
From my mouth I vomit the blood of Pith-Instructions; 
Lazily I stretCh, thrilled by the Dharma-Essence. 
I have many sicknesses, 
And many times have died. 
Dead are my prejudices 
In the [vast] sphere of the View. 
All my distractions and drowsiness 
Have died in the sphere of Practice. 
My pretensions and hypocrisy 
Have died in the sphere of Action. 
Dead are all my fears and hopes 
In the sphere of Accomplishment, 
And my affectations and pretenses 
·In the sphere of Precepts. I, the Yogi, 
Will die in Trikaya's Realm. 
Tc.morrow when this yogi dies 
No fair shroud will he see, 
But the subtle, divine Revelations. 
His corpse will not be bound by hempen rope, 
But by the cord of the Central Channel. 
His corpse-bearers to the cemetery 
Will not be nose-wiping sons, 
But his blessed Son-of-Awareness. 
Not by the gray, earthy road, 
But along the Bodhi-Path 
The [funeral parade] will go. 
The Gurus of the Whispered Lineage will lead 
the way; 
The Oakinis of the Four Divisions will be the 
guides; 
The corpse will not be brought 
To the red and massive hill, 
But to the Hill of Adi Buddha; 

--- PAGE 633 ---
The Meeting with Dhampa Sangje 
The corpse will not be carried 
To the cemetery where foxes play, 
But to the Park of Skill and Wisdom; 
It will be buried only 
In the Grave of Dorje-Chang. 
Dhampa Sangje was greatly pleased by this song. He said, "Your kind 
of craziness is very good." The Jetsun replied, "Since we two yogis 
have now met, it would be appropriate for us to have a sacramental 
feast together." 
"Well, since you are a Tibetan, you should play the part of host," 
commented Dhampa Sangje, "you be the first to prepare the feast." 
Milarepa then removed his skull with the brain inside, and, cutting 
off his forearms and neck, used them to build a hearth. Then he put 
the skull upon the hearth. From his navel he ejected the Dumo Fire to 
heat the skull, and then the brain began. to emit five-colored rays in 
all directions. Dhampa Sangje transformed himself into seven bodies 
standing upon seven stalks of grass, and Milarepa also transformed his 
body into seven [MaQ<;ialas] of Dem Chog, complete with the Eight 
Gates, etc., upon the tips of seven stalks of grass. In each of the 
MaQ<;ialas Buddha Dem Chog was offered the sacramental feast with 
six wondrous enjoyments.8 
The grasses upon which Milarepa's transformed bodies stood were 
slightly bent (as if by the weight of the load). The Jetsun then said 
to Dhampa Sangje, "As to proficiency in the Vase-breathing Practice, 
there is no difference between you and me. Why, then, is the grass 
[upon which I stand] slightly bent?" Dhampa Sangje replied, "There 
is no difference between my Realization7 and yours. This is simply 
due to the fact that you were born a Tibetan. Your Views and Actions 
are identical with mine, therefore both the disciples in your Lineage 
and in mine will see eye to eye in their practices and understandings." 
By their magic powers Milarepa and Dhampa Sangje then returned 
to their own abodes. 
This is the story of Tong Lha. 
NOTES 
1 The Instruction, or Dharma of Relieving All Sorrows (T.T.: Dam.Chos.sDug. 
bsrqaJ.Shi.Byed.). 

--- PAGE 634 ---
2 Bija Pai: Bija is the seed-word of a Mantra. For Pai, see Story H, Note 4. 
3 These four divisions are probably the East, South, West, and North of the 
Ma(,lqala. 
4 The Four Tantras are: Kriya-tantra, Carya-tantra, Yoga-tantra and Anut· 
tara·tantra. 
5 The text reads:· "Yan.Mes.Te.Lo.<;:er.bZan.sMyo." "Ger.bZan" is perhaps 
the abbreviation of dGe.Wahi.b<;:es.gNen.bZan.Po., meaning the good sage or good 
teacher. 
6 This probably refers to the six different tastes: sour, sweet, bitter, pungent, 
salty, and aromatic; it can also refer to the six sexual attractions arising from color, 
form, carriage, voice, smoothness, and features. 
7 Lit.: "There is no difference between your accomplishments in Realization 
and Purification, and mine." 

--- PAGE 635 ---
Obeisance to all Gurus 
THE SAL VA TION 
OF THE DEAD 
W HEN the Jetsun Milarepa was dwelling at the Belly Cave of Nya 
Non, many followers of Bon were living nearby in a place called 
La Shin. In the vicinity of La Shin there also dwelt a very rich man 
who, [although born a Bon] was a devoted Buddhist and, being a 
patron of the Jetsun; never patronized any Bon monk. He had been 
initiated with the Pith-Instructions by Milarepa, and also practiced 
them. 
One day this man caught a fatal illness, which brought him to the 
point of death. Planning to· make his last will and testament, he 
summoned all his relatives and said to them, "For my salvation's 
sake, please offer all my properties and belongings to the Jetsun Milarepa and his disciples. You have all been followers of Bon, but I hope 
you will become Buddhists and practice the beneficial Dharma in your 
next lives." 
But his relatives would not follow his instructions. Fearing that they 
would never invite the Jetsun to visit him, the man said to his daughter, "Why do you people stab a dying man in the heart? If you do 
not follow my wishes and instructions, I will kill myself. Then you will 
be condemned by alii" 
Hearing these words, they gave in, and consented to do what he 
wished. The man then requested, "Do not perform any Bon rite-forthe-dead for me- it is nominal and useless. But please invite the 
Jetsun to come for my sake!" Thus saying, he died. 
In accordance with the deceased's wish, the Jetsun and his disciples 
were invited to the house. They all stayed on the top ftoor,1 while 
the Bon monks, who were also invited for the occasion, remained on 
the lower floor to perform their rites. 
--- PAGE 636 ---
[While these· rites were in progress, suddenly], on the base of the 
Bon Ma~c;lala, there appeared the [unmistakable] form of the dead 
man. Greenish in color, with long hair, it stood there cheerfully drinking beer. Bedha [Milarepa's sister] passed by and saw it. The Bon 
monks said to her, "Milarepa and his followers always fight against 
us. But look, everyone here can witness that we Bonists have actually 
brought the deceased one back- Milarepa and his men could never 
do this!" Saying which, they jeered and laughed at the Jetsun. 
Bedha then reported this incident to Milarepa, who replied, "This 
is not the apparition of the dead man. It is only a trick the Bonists 
have played to beguile people. Now, Shiwa Aui, go and grasp the 
apparition's ring-finger, and ask him for the name that was given him 
by the Jetsun Milarepa in the Belly Cave during his Initiation." 
After a while Shiwa Aui returned and said, "The apparition could 
not withstand the Jetsun's glowing light-of-mercy. When I was just 
about to speak, it said, 'I am leaving now. I am the one who leads dead 
men's spirits for the Bonists- a ghost who comes to this world-ofappearance to make a big noise and eat human flesh. Since not the 
slightest benefit can be gained from the Bon teaching, I have just 
come here to get my wages from the Bon priests.' 
"Then I chased it out," continued Shiwa Aui, "and, with its greenish face and long hair, it dashed away through the streets of the village and to the other side of the mountain, where it became a wolf." 
Having witnessed this occurrence, all the people there were convinced that the apparition was not the real spirit of the dead man. 
The Jetsun then said to the Bonists, "You are showing the way for 
a murderer, but I am showing the way for the dead man." The Bon 
relatives asked, "Then you, Jetsun, must be able to see him; otherwise, how could you show him the way?" Milarepa replied, "Yes, I 
see him. Because of some slight [bad] Karma in his former lives he 
was unable to complete hi~ meritorious deeds, and has now been born 
as an insect. Under a lump of brownish yak dung you will find a 
long, slender insect - that is he. I am now going to send him to the 
Land of Liberation." 
"To convince us, please show us how you liberate him," said the 
patrons. 
"Very well, let us go there, and [you will] see." 
All the people then went with the Jetsun [to the upper valley] 
where they soon came to a lump of brownish, dry dung. The Jetsun 
first called the man by his secret names a few times, and then said, 
"I am your Guru, Milarepa. Now, come out, and come here!" 
From somewhere under the dung a small insect appeared, ftew directly toward the Jetsun, and alighted on him. Milarepa then preached 

--- PAGE 637 ---
The Salvation of the Dead 
the Dharma and performed the Transformation Yoga and the Rite 
of Deliverance for it. [At once the insect died] and its corpse began 
to give out a thin, bright light, which entered and dissolved into the 
Jetsun's heart. Milarepa meditated for a short while, and then from 
his heart the dead man's consciousness emerged, embodied in a white 
"Ah" word glowing with brilliant light; and it ascended higher and 
higher to the sky. Meanwhile the people all heard its voice saying, 
"The precious Jetsun has now delivered me to the joy of Liberation. 
Oh great is llis blessing! Great is his bounty!" 
Having witnessed these things, all the spectators were convinced 
[and confirmed with] great faith. They bowed down to the Jetsun and 
cried, "This is marvelous! This is wonderful!" 
"I have many other things even more marvelous than this," replied 
Milarepa. Whereupon he sang: 
I pray to my wondrous Guru, Marpa; 
I cherish his grace in my mind. 
Pray bless my disciples with your mercy. 
Of all marvels, the greatest is 
The first meeting with my Guru. 
Of all marvels, the greatest is to earn 
Instructions from the Whispered Lineage. 
Of all marvels, the greatest is 
To renounce all worldly things. 
Of all marvels the greatest is 
To stay in the hermitage. 
Of all marvels the greatest is the birth 
Of inner Experience and Realization. 
Of all marvels the greatest is 
To endure hardship in solitude. 
Of all marvels the greatest is 
Indifference to the Eight Worldly Gains. 
Of all marvels the greatest is 
To please my Guru through devotion. 

--- PAGE 638 ---
Of all marvels the greatest is 
The will left by the dead Bonist. 
Of all marvels the greatest is 
Observance of the dead man's will. 
Of all marvels the greatest is 
The liberation of the dead. 
Of all marvels the greatest is 
. The growing faith in this assembly. 
The relatives of the dead man all said, "Surely he did not make 
any mistake in choosing his faith. In order to attain Buddhahood at 
the time of death one should certainly do what he has done."' 
"We all need a savior like the Jetson," said Shiwa Aui, "But it is 
most difficult to meet such a one and to have faith in him." 
Milarepa then replied, "If you, my disciples, want to guide dead 
men's consciousnesses to the Path, you need these qualifications." 
Whereupon he sang: 
Good and sure is the grace of the Whispered Lineage, 
Through which one may attain the Accomplishment 
of l;>ii.kinis. 
My son disciples, ne'er mistake 
Your Dharmic Transmission. 
To cleanse the Karma of ill-fated ones, 
You yourself must keep pure discipline. 
To receive offerings and worship from the patrons, 
You must have compassion and the Bodhi-Mind. 
To be honored as the Chief Lama in the group, 
You require Realization and merit~. 
To please the accomplished Guru, you need 
Unshakable faith and perseverance. 
To take the oblation for the dead, you must 
Have the merit of superb Enlightenment.2 
To emancipate the dead, 
You need miraculous Power 
And genuine Accomplishment. 
To convert faithless men you must 
Be able to work miracles. 

--- PAGE 639 ---
The Salvation of the Dead 
To perform the Mai;~!;lala Ritual on the seventh day, 
You must truly deliver 
The dead man to the Path. 
My disciples and patrons of the Bon, 
Hold doubt in your minds no more. 
The Jetsun's sister Bedha said, "Brother, you have redeemed other 
people's 'souls' like this, but you have done nothing to save the 
'souls' of our own parents! Why?" Saying this, she sobbed bitterly. 
Milarepa took her hand and said, "Bedha, do not feel sad like this. 
To repay the bounty of our parents I have done these 
things 
for 
them." Then he sang: 
I pray to the Jetsun Gurus- pray 
Help me to repay my parents' bounties. 
_ In guiding my parents' "souls" 
Out of their phantom bodies, 
I merged them with my own mind, 
And dissolved them in the Mind-Essence 
Of the Victorious One. 
By His mercy a rainbow light 
Shone forth from the Pure Land; 
And into the "appearing" yet void 
Buddha Kaya their bodies vanished. 
How wondrous is it thus to merge 
In Immanent Buddhahood. 
Their voices, unreal echoes, 
Were merged with Buddha's speech. 
How wondrous is it thus 
To merge with the Self-sound. 
Their minds, in Bardo wandering, 
Were caught by my Samadhi's power. 
Thus thy beheld the Self-face of 
The Illuminating-void Awareness. 
Holding the mind in its natural state 
All confusions are dispelled. 
How wondrous is this state immutable. 

--- PAGE 640 ---
l'HE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
In my life-long devotion, 
With love and with good will 
I recite the Mantra day and night. 
By this merit my parents' sins are cleansed; 
In the Six Realms they will ne'er be born ag~in. 
With holy companions, they are living now in joy; 
With pleasures and enjoyment, they now live happily. 
In the Pure Land of Happiness they are 
Surrounded by Bha W os and I)akinis. 
Dear sister Bedha, worry not nor grieve for them! 
Bedha said, "This is indeed wonderful. But please tell me, what ritual 
did you perform for them?" In .answer, Milarepa sang: 
I pray to the Refuge of all beings -
Pray help me to repay my parents' bounties. 
In the Ma~;u;lala of Non-dual Bliss 
I placed the Buddha images 
Of illuminating Self-awareness. 
In the vase of Holy Scriptures and Instructions 
I placed for rinsing, water of the Six Paramitlis. 
With it I cleansed the filth of the Five Poisons. 
With the Ghagyu Guru's nectar 
I conferred the Four Initiations 
On their bodies, mouths, and minds. 
I showed them the non-distinction of Great Bliss, 
And the successive Realizations of the Path. 
The unity of the Trikaya 
Was the oblation I made for them; 
The Emancipation-from-Desires 
Was the ritual I performed for their deaths. 
With perfect knowledge of timing I brought 
For them the offering of spiritual assistance. 
For them I dedicated the Mahamudra, 
For them I vowed to serve all [sentient beings]. 
My wishes, and those of parent-like beings 
Are all fulfilled and merged in one. 

--- PAGE 641 ---
The Salvation of the Dead 
By thinking of my Guru's grace 
I repaid their bounties. 
Having heard this song, Bedha was firmly convinced. To persuade his 
sister to practice the Dharma with determination, Milarepa sang again: 
I bow down at the feet of Marpa. 
Pray quench the passions of my kinsmen, 
And with the Dharma fuse their minds. 
Awake and listen, sister Bedhal 
If when young you do not practice, 
Why practice then when you grow old? 
If you depend not on the Jetsun Guru, 
Why rely on pleasant Gurus? 
Without the Instruction of the Whispered Lineage, 
What's the use of vain talk and arid words? 
-If you do not know your mind, 
What's the use of learping? 
If in the Void you cannot rest at ease, 
Vain remarks will but increase your sins. 
Self-conceited people 
Who always make a show 
Have no experience within. 
Overweening and suspicious people 
See not that appearances 
Are but amusing plays. 
The pretentious and over-critical 
Are men without compassion, faith, or Bodhi-Mind. 
He who never thinks of 
Buddhahood, is angry, 
And anxious over money, 
Cannot areal Buddhist be. 
Lacking compassion for all beings, 
. Filial piety causes Sarpsara. 
·If one acts against the Dharma 
Friends soon turn to enemies. 
Those who only harm their friends 

--- PAGE 642 ---
Are of the devil's kin, 
However charming they may be! 
He who claims to be a yogi 
But cannot practice Immanence in depth, 
Is only a bewildered man. 
To those who cannot patiently help others 
Friendship brings only quarrels and regret. 
Dear sister Bedha, your sorrow for our mother's grief 
Shows that you have yet to clear 
Your obstacles and sins. 
The Jetsun then sent her to meditate, and as a result, she attained 
extraordinary Experiences and Realizations. The Jetsun was very much 
pleased. To inspire and encourage her, he sang again: 
Listen once more, sister Bedha! 
If one ne'er loses faith in Dharma, 
The ending of all pain will come. 
If one ne'er accuses others, 
People see one as an angel. 
. If one has no harmful thoughts, 
Then one's merits will increase. 
He who clings not now to things, 
Will in his next life be joyful. 
One who has little arrogance, 
Will be loved by all. 
Whoe'er intrinsic mind retains 
Will soon win through to Buddhahood. 
Whoe'er retreats in strict seclusion 
And refrains from talking, 
By :Oakinis will be blessed. 
If you have no desire for pleasure, 
Your Ripening Karma will be killed. 
If till death you meditate, 
You are the King of kings! 
If mind be free of fraud and tangles, 
I;>akinis and Bha Wos receive you. 

--- PAGE 643 ---
The Salvation of the Dead 
If you pray [now and always] to your Jetson Guru 
Accomplishment and blessing will be yours. 
Bear these words in mind, and meditate! 
May joy and good fortune e'er be with you! 
[Later], Bedha was able to meditate in solitude with great perseverance. As a result she gained exceptional Experiences and Realizations, and eventually she could match the m~ts of the four [foremost] 
spiritual daughters of the Jetson. 
The Bonists who attended the ceremony on this occasion were all 
confirmed with irrevocable faith toward Milarepa. 
This is the story of the salvation of the dead man, and of Milarepa's 
guiding his sister to the Bodhi [Path]. 
NOTES 
1 Tibetan houses are usually constructed with three floors, the stable and 
storeroom being located on the ground floor, and the living room, kitchen, etc., on 
the middle floor. The prayer room, altar, and guest room usually occupy the top 
floor. 
2 The merit of superb Enlightenment: This is a free translation. Literally it 
should read: "The merit of the [initial stage] of the Enlightment in the Path" 
(mThon.Lam.Gyi.Yon.Tan.). The initial stage, or the First Bhiimi, is considered 
the most important and critical stage in the Bodhisattva's Path. True Enlightenment is realized when one reaches this stage. See Story 44, Note 3. 

--- PAGE 644 ---
FULFILLMENT OF THE 
OAKINIS' PROPHECY 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
0 NCE when the Jetsun Milarepa was dwelling in the upper valley of 
Tsar Ma at Nya Non, some of his patrons fought one another over 
the dowry of a new bride. When they came to the Jetsun for meditation he summoned all the participants, reconciled them with good 
advice, and preached much Dharma for them. Then he sang: 
Listen, you conceited men 
With r~cks upon your heads! 
This is the sort of trouble that is caused by women 
Who for a long time have not had a man. 
Man-craving women are all trouble-makers 
Who foster only evil thoughts within. 
Wicked are the spreaders 
Of discord everywhere. 
This bride of an evil valley at an evil 
Time has become invaluable to the "blind"; 
This filthy baggage has been the cause 
Of dispute among the men. 
Alas, these are unworthy, worldly acts; 
Elders, do not instigate them, 
Young men, be sane and sober. 
According to the Dharma's teaching 
Everyone here assembled 
Should try to change his mind! 
Moved by this song, the disputants were all pacified. Then the lady 
patron Jham Mei, a very faithful follower of the Jetsun, made sumptu-
--- PAGE 645 ---
Fulfillment of the Diikinis' Prophecy 
ous offerings to him. Standing up from a row in the assembly, she 
asked, "Revered Jetsun, Precious One, please tell us, how have you 
accomplished your altruistic deeds? How many disciples do you have? 
And among them, how many have attained Enlightenment?" Milarepa replied, "It is very wonderful that these questions have arisen in 
your mind. As prophesied by the .J;>akinis, I have done these things to 
benefit sentient beings": 
I pray to the Gurus and .Oakinis - pray 
Help me without effort to benefit all men. 
As .Oakinis foretold, like the sun 
Is the NirmaQakaya Dhagpo, 
Whose light will brighten all; like the moon 
Is NirmaQakaya Rechungpa; 
And Shiwa Aui, the elder brother, 
Is a tiger-like meditator. 
'Vith Drigom and other Repas I have five-
, And-twenty leading disciples as foretold. 
Among my disciples, five-and-twenty are accomplished 
beings; 
One hundred the Realization have attained; 
One hundred and eight, the Spontaneous Experience; 
Near one thousand, union with the Dharma; and more 
Than a hundred thousand have won Dharmic affiliations. 
A few disciples have 
Learned other arts from me. 
Your questions are most good, 
You are indeed well-endowed! 
Hearing this, the disciples at the meeting all exclaimed, "Oh, many 
accomplished beings will come! How wonderful is this!" All were overwhelmed with joy and exaltation. Then they besought Milarepa to 
make good wishes for them. The Jetsun said, "Since this time both 
the receiver and the patrons are sincere, good wishes are automatically 
made. Nonetheless, I shall follow Buddha's example and say the dedication-wishes for you. You should now follow, and repeat this song 
after me": 
I pray to my Guru, Patron Buddha, 
And all gods - pray fulfill all my good wishes. 
Let all here now recite with me, 

--- PAGE 646 ---
For I know the way to Buddhahood. 
Pray remember me, ye Buddhas, Bodhisattvas, and 
Sanghas! 
Since.beginningless time in this great Saq1sara, 
I and all sentient beings have practiced 
Charity, discipline, and other merits. 
Thinking of them, my mind is full of joy! 
To my parents and teachers I dedicate 
All the merits that in this life I may have earned 
In giving alms and service 
To Buddhahood's attainment. 
Before the [last] day comes, may I, 
By the power of my merits, 
Meet a Mahayana teacher 
And observe the Precepts Three. 
May all my good wishes be fulfilled, 
And may I never commit sinful deeds. 
By the power of my merits may I 
Gain long life and prosperity: 
Meeting good companions and favorable conditions, 
May all hindrances to Liberation pass away from me. 
While Milarepa was singing this song, an echo from Heaven was 
heard by all. 
After some time, the people of Nya Non heard that the Jetsun was 
about to leave for other hermitages. They all came with good offerings, 
and besought him not to go. The Jetsun replied, "I have been staying here for quite a long time. My patrons may now h~ve become 
wearied [of me]. I am going to another place to await the coming 
of my death. If I do not die soon, there will always be a chance for 
us to meet again. In the meantime, you should all try to practice 
these things": 
Obeisance to my perfect Guru! 
Property and possessions 
Are like dew on the grass -
Give them without avarice away. 
A human body that can practice Dharma is most 
precious-

--- PAGE 647 ---
Fulfillment of the Diikinis' Prophecy 
[To attain it again] you should keep the Prec~ts 
well 
As if protecting your own eyes! 
Anger brings one to the Lower 
Realms, so never lose your temper, 
Even though your life be forfeit. 
Inertia and slackness never bring AccomplishmentExert yourself therefore in devotion. 
Through distractions Mahayana can 'ne'er be understoodPractice therefore concentration. 
Since Buddhahood cannot be won without, 
Watch the nature of your mind within. 
Like fog is faith unstableWhen it starts to fade, you should 
Strengthen it more than ever. 
The patrons all cried, "Whatever you say, we won't let you go! By 
all means, please remain here!" Thus they besought him with the 
utmost earnestness. The Jetsun replied, "If I do not die, I shall try 
to come back to your village. If for some time we cannot see each 
other, try at times to remember and practice these things." Whereupon 
he sang: 
Alas, how pitiful are worldly being~! 
Like precious jade they cherish 
Their bodies, yet like ancient trees 
They are doomed in the end to fall. 
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts, 
And pay heed to the Dharma. 
Though you gather wealth as hard 
As bees collect their honey, 
The ills that on you may fall 
Can never be foretold. 
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts 
And pay heed to the Dharma. 

--- PAGE 648 ---
One may offer to a Lama 
Loads of silk for many years; 
But when an ill-fortune descends, 
Like a fading rainbow 
One's faith at once dissolves. 
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts 
And pay heed to the Dharma. 
Like a pair of mated beasts, 
Lovers live together, 
But calamity by the wolf's attack 
May fall on you at any time. 
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts, 
And pay heed to the Dharma. 
You may cherish your dear son, 
Like a hen hatching her egg; 
But a falling rock may crush it at any time. 
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts 
And pay heed to the Dharma! 
A face may be pretty as a flower, 
Yet at any time it can be spoiled by violent hail. 
Think at times of how this world 
Is sorry, transient, and futile. 
Though son and mother have affection 
For each other, when discords arise, 
Like foes they clash and quarrel. 
Sometimes toward all sentient beings 
You should feel compassion. 
Basking in the warm sunlight 
May be pleasant and a comfort, 
But a storm of woe may rise 
And choke you at any time. 
Remember sometimes the deprived, 
And give alms to those in need. 
Oh, dear men and women patrons, 
For he who cannot practice Dharma, 
All his life will be meaningless, 
All his acts wrongdoings! 

--- PAGE 649 ---
Fulfillment of the Diikinis' Prophecy 
"Yes, Revered Jetsun, we shall follow your instructions," said the 
patrons, "But we cannot bear to see you go away. Please, remain for 
our sake!" [But] Milarepa stayed in the Belly Cave for [only) a short 
time, and then went to the lower part of the valley. Standing on a 
rock, he left a pair of indented footprints on it as a token of memory 
to which the people of Nya Non might pay their homage and respect. 
Then, without the knowledge of the patrons, he went away. 
This is the story of Milarepa giving his final admonishment to the 
patrons of Nya Non. 

--- PAGE 650 ---
ADMONISHMENTS TO 
PHYSICIAN YANG NGE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
THE Jetsun Milarepa and his five disciples now set out for Tong 
Lha. On the way they encountered five robbers, who searched them 
arid found only some bowls and skulls. Then they asked, "Are you 
people called 'Milarepas'?" The Jetsun answered, "I am Milarepa." The 
robbers all bowed down to him and said, "We are indeed fortunate 
to meet you! Now please grant us some instructions." The Jetsun then 
preached for them the teaching of Karma, including such topics as the 
joy and merit of the higher realms, the miseries and vices of the three 
lower realms, and how good and bad deeds, respectively, would bring 
forth happiness and suffering. Then he added, "This is my advice: 
take it or not, it is entirely up to you. Listen to this song": 
. I bow down to the perfect Gurus. 
High above, in the Heaven of Pleasures, 
The Devas sow their rice, 
And the crop is ripe 
As the seeds are sown. 
It is not that their method 
Of farming is superior, 
It is simply the Karmic reward 
For their good deeds in former lives. 
Men of endowment, give your alms! 
Down below are wretched beings 
In the great Eighteen Hells. When 
Their bodies by the saw are cut 
--- PAGE 651 ---
Admonishments to Physician Yang N ge 
The wounds are healed at once; 
'Tis not because their skin is healthy, 
But is Karmic retribution 
For those they killed in former lives. 
Men of endowment, never kill! 
In the dark realm yonder 
Wander hungry ghosts. 
As they finish eating 
They feel hungry again; 
The reason is not their stomachs' size, 
It is Karmic retribution 
For stinginess in former lives. 
Men of endowment, never be parsimonious! 
Near the Cleansing Pond 
Is Duinjo's wondrous cow, 
Ever ready to give milk. 
But it is up to you 
Whether or no you catch her. 
Under the root of the Wish-fulfilling Tree 
Is the drug that cures all five diseases. 
Yet it is entirely up to you 
Whether or no you dig for it. 
In front of a good Guru 
Is the Key of Pith-Instructions 
To the door of the Two [Perfections),l 
But it is entirely up to you 
Whether or no you open it. 
Hearing this song, great faith was aroused in all five robbers. Four 
of them swore that they would never kill or rob again. One decided 
to follow the Jetsun, and was accepted as a servant-disciple. Later he 
gained the Realization and became an advanced yogi. 
After this incident, Milarepa and his disciples went down to Din Ri 
Namar. Meeting a shepherd on the way, Milarepa asked him, "Tell. 
me, who is the outstanding patron in this place?'' The shepherd answered, "There is a physician called Yang Nge -he is a rich and devoted Buddhist." They proceeded to the physician's house, and saw 
him standing among many people who were gathering there. Mila-

--- PAGE 652 ---
TIJE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
repa said, "Dear patron, we were told that you are the richest man here. 
We ask you to give us some food this morning." The physician replied, 
"On the other side of the mountain there is Milarepa, on this side, 
Dhampa Sangje. The stream of yogi pilgrims never stops flowing. How 
can I afford to give charity to every one of them? Now, I shall only 
give alms to Milarepa if he comes here himself. Of course, I know 
that I may not have the good Karma to see him at all." The Jetsun 
replied, "I can say that I am Milarepa himself. Now bring us the 
food." 
"It is said that the Jetsun Milarepa can use anything at hand as 
a metaphor to preach. Now please use the bubbles of water in this 
ditch before us as a metaphor and give us a discourse," said the physician. In response, the Jetsun sang a song, "The Fleeting Bubbles": 
I pay homage to my gracious Guru -
The Essence of all Buddhas at all times. 
Pray make everyone here think of the Dharma! 
As he said once, "Like bubbles i!! 
This life, transient and fleetingIn it no assurance can be found." 
A layman's life is like a thief 
Who sneaks into an empty house. 
Know you not the folly of it? 
Youth is like a summer flowerSuddenly it fades away. 
Old age is like a fire spreading through 
The fields- suddenly 'tis at your heels. 
The Buddha once said, "Birth and death are like 
Sunrise and sunset -now come, now go." 
Sickness is like a little bird 
Wounded by a sling. 
Know you not, health and strength 
Will in time desert you? 
Death is like an oil-dry lamp 
[After its last flicker]. 
Nothing, I assure you, 
In this world is permanent. 
Evil Karma is like a waterfall, 
Which I have never seen flow upward. 
A sinful man is like a poisonous tree -
If on it you lean you will be injured. 

--- PAGE 653 ---
Admonishments to Physician Yang Nge 
Transgressors are like frost-bitten peas -
Like spoiled fat, they ruin everything. 
Dharma practicers are like peasants in the fieldWith caution and vigor they will be successful. 
The Guru is like medicine and nectar -
Relying on him, one will win success. 
Discipline is like a watchman's towerObserving it, one will attain Accomplishment. 
The Law of Karma is like Sarpsara's wheelWhoever breaks it wi11 suffer a great loss. 
Sarpsiira is like a poisonous thorn 
In the flesh - if not pulled out, 
The poison will increase and spread. 
The coming of death is like the shadow 
Of a tree at sunset- it runs 
Fast and none can halt it. 
When that time arrives, what else 
Can help but the holy Dharma? 
Though Dharma is the fount of victory, 
Those who aspire to it are rare. 
Scores of men are tangled in 
The miseries of SarpSiira; 
Into this misfortune born, they strive 
By plunder and theft for gain. 
He who talks on Dharma 
With elation is inspired, 
But when a task is set him, 
He is wrecked and lost. 
Dear patrons, do not talk too much, 
But practice the holy Dharma. 
"This is indeed very helpful to my mind," commented the physician, "but please preach still further for me on the truth of Karma 
and the suffering of birth, old age, illness, and death, thus enabling 
me to gain a deeper conviction on Buddhism." In response, the ~et­
sun sang: 
In the realm of the Great Unborn 
He shines with the Four Infinities-

--- PAGE 654 ---
To my wish-granting Jetsun Guru, 
The Guide to the Path of Greatest Joy, 
I pay my heart-felt praise. 
Please listen to these words, 
Dear friends here assembled. 
When you are young and vigorous 
You ne'er think of old age corning, 
But it approaches slow and sure 
Like a seed growing underground. 
When you are strong and healthy 
You ne'er think of sickness corning, 
But it descends with sudden force 
Like a stroke of lightning. 
When involved in worldly things 
You ne'er think of death's approach. 
Quick it comes like thunder 
Crashing round your head. 
Sickness, old age, and death 
Ever meet each other 
As do hands and mouth. 
Waiting for his prey in ambush, 
Yarna is ready for his victim 
When disaster catches him. 
Sparrows fly in single file. Like them, life 
Death, and Bardo follow one another. 
Never apart from you 
Are these three "visitors." 
Thus thinking, fear you 
Not your sinful deeds? 
Like strong arrows in ambush waiting, 
Rebirth in Hell, as hungry ghost, or beast 
Is [the destiny] waiting to catch you. 
If once into their traps you fall, 
Hard will you find it to escape. 
Do you not fear the miseries 

--- PAGE 655 ---
Admonishments to Physician Yang Nge 
You experienced in the past? 
Surely you will feel much pain 
If misfortunes attack you? 
The woes of life succeed one another 
Like the sea's incessant wavesOne has barely passed, before 
The next one takes its place. 
Until you are liberated, pain 
And pleasure come and go at random 
Like passers-by encountered in the street. 
Pleasures are precarious, 
Like bathing in the sun; 
Transient, too, as snow storms 
Which come without warning. 
Remembering these things, 
Why practice not the Dharma? 
Hearing this song, great faith in the Jetsun was aroused in all. 
They presented him with many good offerings, and asked him to stay 
there permanently. Milarepa did not accept their invitation, but only 
consented to remain overnight. 
The physician besought the Jetsun to give them some instructions 
before he left. Then he summoned all the villagers, and added, "If, 
Revered Jetsun, you cannot stay here even for a few days, then please 
grant us some Dharma to practice." In response, Milarepa sang: 
Listen with care, all you assembled here; 
Do you truly want to practice Dharma? 
If you do, you should try these things: 
When lying down in bed, let not 
Yourself go with ignorance; 
At evening, recite the Patron Buddha 
Mantra; at night, pray to the Holy Ones; 
At midnight, meditate on Non-distinction. When 
The day breaks, practice the Life-Prat:ta; in the morn, 
Repent of your wrongdoings; when the sun 
Rises, identify your mind with forms. 
In practice, the main thing 
Is the Self-mind to watch; 
The pith of all instructions 
Is received from your Guru. 

--- PAGE 656 ---
TilE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA 
You should; then, always pray 
To your Patron Buddha; 
Keep the Samaya Rules 
With your Vajra brothers; 
To the Three Precious Ones 
Always offer service. 
E'er on your head visualize Him who is All Merciful, 
Reciting the holy Mantra of the Jewel Lotus.2 
Always to the.poor give charity, and help 
Those in need; ever serve and give alms 
To priests of learning and discipline; 
At all times take care of your parents. 
Were a hundred scholars and Gurus gathered 
Here, they could not give you better instruction. 
May prosperity and joy 
Follow you through all your livest 
May good health and long life 
Be with you at all times! 
Moved by this song, the audience were all confirmed with an unshakable faith toward the Jetsun. Later, the physician entered the Path 
at the time of his death. 
After this incident, Milarepa and his disciples set out for Chu Bar. 
This is the story of the Physician, Yang Nge. 
NOTES 
1 Two Perfections: the Perfection of Merit, and the Perfection of Wisdom. 
2. That is, the Mantra of Avalokitesvara: Om.Ma.Ne.Padme.Hum. 

--- PAGE 657 ---
RECHUNGPA'S DEPARTURE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
RECHUNCPA, the heart-son disCiple of the Jetsun Milarepa, had difficulty because of his affiliation with the [noblewoman], Lady 
Dembu. In order to free him from this hindrance, Milarepa transformed himself into a beggar and came to Rechungpa for alms. Now 
Rechungpa possessed [at that time] a very large piece of jade, obtained from a ravine in the valley of Yagder. This he gave to the 
"beggar," saying, "Use this jade to buy your food." Milarepa thought, 
"My son has no attachment to material wealth, but has great compassion." 
As a consequence of this almsgiving, Rechungpa separated from the 
Lady Dembu; disheartened and wearied of her, he left, and returned 
to the Jetsun. 
On his way back he came to the house of a rich man and was 
given two portions of dried meat, which he preserved with great care 
in order to bring them back to the Jetsun as a present. At that time 
Milarepa was staying at Chu Bar with some of his disciples. He said 
to them, "Rechul"gpa is coming, and is bringing us something so extremely large that. a whole valley is not big enough to contain it." 
Before long Rechungpa arrived. He offered a bag of the dried meat 
to the Jetsun and asked after his health. In answer, Milarepa sang: 
A yogi, I roam the mountains; 
Like a great Mar:t4ala, 
My body is full of bliss. 
Cleansed of desires and pride, 
I feel well and happy. 
With longing for diversions killed 
I feel joy in solitude. 
Since I have renounced aU things, 
--- PAGE 658 ---
Happy am I in no-man's land. 
Since I have cut off ties of kinsfolk 
Getting and saving are not worries -
Happy and joyous do I live. 
Without desire for scholarship or study 
Of more books, I have no inferior feelings -
With Mind-Essence I feel only happiness. 
I am well and happy 
Without "gab" and "babble," 
For I do not want proud talk. 
I am well and happy 
Without plans or schemes. 
For my mind is free from fraud. 
I am well and happy, for I never 
Involve myself in slanderous gossip 
And I desire no fame or glory. 
Where'er I stay, whate'er I wear 
Or eat, I feel truly happy. 
At all times am I happy and well. Son 
Rechungpa, you are in health on your return? 
Whereupon Rechungpa offered the dried meat to all the Repas 
without discrimination or stinginess. One of them asked Milarepa, 
"Revered Jetsun, you have just told us that Rechungpa would bring 
us a big present, larger than the whole valley can contain; but where 
is it?" With a smile Milarepa replied, "The valley is your stomach, 
and the meat is that big present- too big to be stuffed into it." Hearing this, the Repas all burst into hearty laughter. 
The Jetsun then said, "I am going to give you all an Initiation, but 
according to the Dharma an offering to the Guru is necessary; you 
may bring anything you have, but Rechungpa is a special case -he 
can do without one." Hearing this, Rechungpa unhappily joined in 
the ceremony. 
When he approached the Mar:t~ala he saw the big jade which he had 
given to the beggar standing right in its center. He was dumfounded; then suddenly he realized that the beggar was his Guru's transformation, used to sever the bonds between himself and Lady Dembu. 
[Reviewing the whole event in retrospect], Rechungpa now felt deeply grateful to the Jetsun. 
"Rechungpa," said the Jetsun, "Had it not been for me, this jade 
would have carried you to destruction. It is only because of your un-

--- PAGE 659 ---
Rechungpa' s Departure 
ceasing faith and veneration toward me, and your great compassion 
for all sentient beings, that you are freed from this hindrance. Now 
you should be grateful and happy. Listen to my song": 
· 
Great was the blessing of the Father Guru, 
Important was Milarepa's miracle, 
Vital were Rechungpa's charity and love! 
The jade you gave the beggar 
Is with us here; this evening 
We may offer it to Dem Chog 
At our Initiation rite. 
To give alms to the needy with compassion 
Is equal to serving Buddhas in the Three Times. 
To give with sympathy to beggars is 
To make offerings to Milarepa. 
Sentient beings are one's parents; to 
Discriminate between them is harmful and 
Ignorant. True sages and 
Scholars are always in accord; 
Clinging to one's School and condemning others 
Is the certain way to waste one's learning. 
Since all Dharmas equally are good, 
Those who cling to sectarianism 
Degrade Buddhism and sever 
Themselves from Liberation. 
All the happiness one has 
Is derived from others; 
All the help one gives to them 
In return brings happiness. 
One's peJ;llicious deeds 
Only harm oneself. 
Enter this Mal)Qala with benevolent 
Mind; confess, repent you of your sins, observe 
All precepts with determination. 
Rechungpa was deeply moved. In remorse, he confessed all his 
transgressions before his Guru and his brothers-in-the-Dharma in this 
song: 
Yearning for physical enjoyments, 

--- PAGE 660 ---
In pursuit of pleasure I indulged. 
Falling for tempations, I committed 
Debasing deeds that lead to misery. 
Befo're the body of my Father Guru 
I now confess them fully. 
Craving for talk leads to deceit 
And lies, a glib tongue and clever 
Words drag one right down to Hell. 
Wine and meat that please the mouth 
Tum one into a hungry ghost. 
All my untrue and shameless talk, 
I now confess in full before my Father Guru's mouth. 
To crave for pleasure causes evil thoughts, 
To yearn for fame creates most filthy acts. 
All my sinful deeds, caused by desire and greed, 
I now confess in full before 
My Father Guru's mind. 
Wandering in towns and hamlets, 
My practices were interrupted; 
Performing many exorcisms, 
My Mantra power grew feeble; 
Becoming far too active, my good 
Samadhi experience faded. 
To the MaQc;lala's Gods 
I now confess these wrongs. 
In a house where many people live 
I distinguished between "mine" and "yours." 
All my smallness· and degradation 
I confess to my Dharma-brothers. 
Thereupon the Jetsun initiated the Repas with the "Pointing-out" 
exercise in an elaborate manner. After the ceremony, Repa Shiwa Aui 
arose from the assembly and asked, "Rechungpa is a yogi who has 
completely mastered the Pral)a-Mind. Why should a man such as he 
still need the Jetsun's protection and care when he takes a lady for 
Tantric practice? And why should such a man still repent before you 
for this act?" The Jetsun replied, "This is because [in order to practice 
the secret action], one must know the right time and the right conditions." Whereupon he sang: 

--- PAGE 661 ---
Rechungpa's Departure 
I bow down to my gracious Guru Marpa -
Pray lead me with your blessing to the Path, 
Help me to understand the mind-state of my disciples! 
Knowing not the right time to 
Practice, one's Yoga will stray; 
Knowing not the right time to 
Speak, the elders will go astray; 
Knowing not the right time to give 
Food, the good housewife will go astray; 
Knowing not the right time to perform 
Their duties, the servants will go astray; 
Knowing not the right time to meet 
The foe, the fighters will go astray; 
Knowing not the right time to meet 
Conditions, noble monks will stray; 
Knowing not the right time to help others, 
Altruistic deeds will go astray. 
Without perseverence and determination, 
To stay in the mountains will be a waste of time. 
If men consider not nor help each other, 
Companionship and brotherhood are lost. 
If a disciple does not keep his Guru's rules, 
The relationship with him will soon be broken. 
Boundless, alas, are errors and deviations, 
How can one list them all? 
Dear sons, you should practice 
In accordance with my words! 
Hearing this song, all the disciples gained a decisive understanding. 
Rechungpa then made a solemn vow before the Jetsuq that he would 
observe and obey all his instructions. Thereafter he served Milarepa 
[even more] earnestly than before. 
One night Rechungpa dreamt that he put a load of wool on [the 
back of] a dog, and shouted, "Write the words! Write the words!" 
Then they set out, and reached a mountain pass. From one side of 
the mountain came eighty-eight people to escort them, and from the 
other came another eighty-eight people to welcome them. Rechungpa 
asked the Jetsun to interpret this dream for him. In answer, Milarepa 
sang: 

--- PAGE 662 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSAND SONGS OF MILAREPA . 
The dog shows that you will have 
A friend, the wool that your mind 
Will be benign and gentle. 
"Write the words" means that 
You will be well-learned. 
The shouting shows you will sing 
From wonderful Experience. 
The two groups of eighty-eight 
Means that so many people 
Will escort and welcome you. 
Another night Rechungpa dreamt that he threw off his clothes and 
washed his body with water, then became a bird that flew away and 
alighted on a tree. Then he saw a mirror and looked into it. In explaining this dream, Milarepa sang: 
Throwing off your clothes implies 
Relinquishment of all desires. 
Washing your body with clean water means 
Purification through the Instructions. 
[Transforming into] a bird implies 
Kindness and compassion. The bird's 
Two wings are the Two Provisions. 
Alighting on the branch reveals 
That in the Bodhi Tree you'll sit. 
The mirror you saw implies 
Revelations by J)akinis. 
Again one night Rechungpa dreamt that he rode backward on a 
donkey, and wore a robe called "Hopei" The Jetsun explained the 
dream in this song: 
Turning your back tow~rd Saqtsara 
You ride the Mahayana's ass. 
When Nirviit;ta's welcome comes 
You will fulfill the hopes of all. 
Another night Rechungpa dreamt that he put a jewel upon his 
head and donned an immaculate robe. Then he looked into a bright 
mirror having no stain upon it. In the right hand he held a Vajra, 
in the left a human skull full of blood. He also dreamt that he sat 
cross-legged on a lotus seat; his back radiated beams of light and his 
body was ablaze with a great fire. He saw a fountain springing up be-

--- PAGE 663 ---
Rechungpa' s Departure 
fore him, and the sun and moon shone from his heart. On his left 
stood men and women in even number; on his right, a child was herding a kid, which then multiplied into many goats. Rechungpa went to 
the Jetsun and asked him to interpret the dream. The Jetsun replied, 
"The meaning of the dream is this": 
The jewel means that you should always 
Think of your Guru upon your head; 
The pure white robe implies the Whispered 
Lineage; looking into the mirror means 
The "Pointing-out" Performance; holding 
The Vajra in the right hand indicates 
The destruction of all wandering thoughts. 
The skull in your left hand is a symbol 
Of your Bliss-Void Experience; the lotus 
Seat implies your freedom from all faults; 
Your sitting cross-legged indicates 
You will be in Samadhi long; 
The light radiating from your back 
Means that you will realize aright. 
The fountain that gushes forth before you means 
That you will have Signs and Experiences; 
The fire that from your body flames 
Is the burning of Dumo heat; 
The sun and moon are proof 
Of your Illumination. 
The men and women standing on your left 
Means that Bha Wos and Mos will welcome you; 
On your right the kid and goats are proof 
That you will protect your disciples; 
The multiplying of the kids foretells· 
The spreading of the Whispered Lineage. 
The Jetsun continued, "Since you have reached this state, it will not 
be necessary for you to stay with me any longer. You should leave, now 
that the right time has come for you to benefit sentient beings on a 
grand scale." Then he· sang: 
Hearken, my son Rechungpal Knowing 
The dependent origination 
Of Sa111sara and Nirvat;~a, if 
You can rely on a holy Guru, 

--- PAGE 664 ---
To you will come the Pith-Instructions 
Without effort and search. 
Listen, my son Rechungpa! If you 
Can conquer the desire for city 
Life and remain in the hermitage, 
The Accomplishment will come of .itself 
Without effort and striving. 
If you can forego evil deeds and clinging 
And can renounce all your wants and cravings, 
Quietly will you tread the Path of Joy 
Without attachment or desires·. 
Listen, oh my son, the root 
Of Saq1sara is to bear; 
If you can cut off the clinging-love 
For sons and live in solitude, 
Quietly will you. enter Buddha's Land. 
Listen, my son, though through 
Tibet the Dharma spreads, many 
Adulterate it. People call 
Themselves Gurus and disciples, 
But with their clever tongues 
They indulge in obscene talk. 
Go, my son, go and teach them, 
Show them the right teachings 
Of the pure Lineage! 
Listen, my son Rechungpa, 
If from your heart you want 
To practice holy Dharma, 
Remember that Buddhism should 
Make one conquer one's desires. 
Try to renounce all greed, 
Refrain from talking much. 
Listen, son Rechungpa, 
If you want Buddhahood 
Forget all pleasures of this life, strive 
For Realization stabilized within, 
And never from the base of your Self-mind depart. 

--- PAGE 665 ---
Rechungpa' s Departure 
The Jetsun then said, "Rechungpa, in the past when you should 
have remained in one place, you wanted to go away. But now you 
should go to the Doh of Loro [near] Shar Bo forest [which is close 
to] Shambo Snow Mountain on the Tibetan border. There you can 
benefit sentient beings." 
Rechungpa, my elder son, 
You are going now to Weu. 
Of my four sons you are 
The most manly one. 
Dear son of various Successions, 
Think of your Guru on your head, and go. 
Keep the Samaya Rules with care, and go! 
Torch-bearer of the Whispered Lineage, 
Go and dispel the mists of ignorance! 
Go and ripen gifted disciples, 
Reveal nothing to the incapable. 
Go and plant the life-tree of Dharma, 
Looking with love after the gifted. 
Go south to the border regions, 
And meditate on Shambo Mountain. 
Son Rechungpa, you will have your temple 
On the border between Tibet and Doh. 
Having made all preparations for the journey, Rechungpa came to 
the Jetsun, bowed down to him, and sang this song: 
Following your order, Father Guru, 
Your elder son is going now to W eu. 
Pray bless him with your Vajra Body, 
On his journey; pray, with your 
Immaculate Words, protect 
Him from all hindrances; 
With your mindless thought 
Lead him to the Path. 
Dear Father Jetsun, of yourself 
Take care and preserve your health. 
Your son is going now to W eu; 
Pray escort him on his journey. 

--- PAGE 666 ---
Pray, Precious One - the shelter 
Of all beings, who embodies 
All Buddhas of all times -
Take care and keep in health. 
Pray, Omniscient One, who works 
Wonders with the Eyes of Dharma, 
Pray keep well and of yourself take care. 
Pray, Precious One, whose bounty 
[I] hardly can repay -
Pray dispel all darkness, 
And in good health remain. 
Pray, mighty Guru, the BodhiPath's benevolent guide, 
Pray of yourself take care. 
In sending Rechungpa upon his journey, the Jetsun sang a song 
of the View, Practice, and Action: 
Son, the View is to rid oneself of sectarianism, 
The Practice is to remain in the hermitage, 
The Action is to eschew bad companionship, 
The Discipline is to harmonize all forms, 
The Accomplishment is gained by thinking [e'er] 
of death. 
The Jetsun continued, "In the year of the Hare, the month of the 
Horse, and on the fourteenth day, you should return. This is very important." Then he gave Rechungpa a piece of gold and bestowed upon 
him many of his most cherished Instructions. Rechungpa said, "Though 
I cannot bear to depart from you, I have to obey your order. I must 
now leave for Weu." As Rechungpa said this, tears rolled down his 
face. To make the wish of seeing the Jetsun again, he sang: 
The rivers of India and Nepal, 
Divided by different valleys, 
Flow in different directions. 
Yet, as rivers, they are all alike -
In the great ocean they will meet again. 
Divided by the Four Continents, 
The sun rises in the East, the moon 

--- PAGE 667 ---
Rechungpa' s Departure 
Sets in the West; as light-bearers 
They are both alike: on a cloudless 
Autumn evening they sometimes see each other. 
Veiled by ignorance, 
The minds of man and Buddha 
Appear to be different; 
Yet in the realm of Mind-Essence 
They both are of one taste. SomeTime they will meet each other 
In the great Dharmadhatu. 
Because of Maya's working, 
The father Jetsun remains 
On the hill, while Rechungpa, 
The son, travels to far places; 
Yet in the Dharmakaya 
Never do they separate. 
In the Og-Men Heaven 
They will meet again. 
Dear Father Jetsun, please keep well. 
I, Rechungpa, am leaving now for Weul 
Rechungpa bowed down to the Jetsun, touching his feet with his 
head, and·once more made many wishes. Then he set out for Weu. 
While Rechungpa was living at the Forest Temple of Shar Mo, his 
lady came to him for forgiveness. At first he would not see her, but 
later, because of his compassion and the earnest entreaties of Rin Chin 
Drags, he relented and granted her an interview. She was destitute and 
appeared to have undergone many physical and mental trials. Seeing 
her in such a pitiful state, Rechungpa was deeply moved. He shed many 
tears, gave her a nugget of gold, and sang this song: 
I bow at the feet of Mila 
The supreme. Pray in your pity 
Make me remember your bounties. 
You, the zealous talker, 
Look not as you did before. 
On my return to my Guru 
I saw in the Mat:t9ala that great lump 

--- PAGE 668 ---
Of jade about which our dispute arose. 
When I saw it, all the hairs 
Of my body stood on end. 
Formerly, my Guru said, 
"Do not, do not go to W eu." 
But later he said, 
"Go now to W eu!" 
Thinking of this, I can but feel amazed. 
In the life of my Father Jetsun, 
One finds that he treats gold like stones; 
Giving me this gold, he said, 
"Take it, take it with you now." 
Thinking of this, I can but feel amazed. 
With this piece of gold you can 
Guild images of Buddha, 
And cleanse your bodily sins. 
With this piece of gold you can 
Practice rituals and Mantras, 
Cleansing thus your sins of speech. 
With it you can also build 
Many stiipas and Tsa Tsas, 
Cleansing thus your sins of mind. 
Referring all things to your Self-mind within, 
Practice the teachings of the Whispered Lineage; 
Pray and pray again to your Jetsun Guru, 
Often rouse the thought of renunciation. 
If you can do this you will 
Attain great Accomplishment! 
Feeling deep pity for her and her uncle, Rechungpa took them 
both under his care. He then imparted the Instructions to them and 
set them to meditating. The uncle was thus cured of leprosy, and the 
lady also gained good Experiences and Realizations. Later, it was said, 
she became a very good yogini and benefited many sentient beings. 
This is the latter part of the story of Rechungpa's journey to Weu. 

--- PAGE 669 ---
THE STORY OF DRASHI TSE 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
0 NE time at Lha Dro of Drin, the Jetsun Milarepa was patronized 
by Drashi Tse, who, in an assembly attended by many patrons, 
stood up and .said, "Revered Jetsun, when I hear people preaching 
the Dharma I always feel very happy. But I know that I cannot be a 
great yogi and a well-learned priest at the same time. Witnessing the 
fact that you, the Jetsun, have devoted yourself solely to the practice, 
I was confirmed with great faith. Do you think I should concentrate 
my effort on meditation alone, or not?" The Jetsun replied, "It is for 
the very sake of practice that the Dharma is preached and studied. If 
one does not practice or meditate, both studying and preaching will be 
meaningless. Now listen to my song": 
Without practice, the Dharma of preaching 
Leads only to pride. Without fostering, 
An adopted son always becomes a foe. 
Without instruction, a load 
Of books is but a burden; 
Except for lies and boasting 
What goou can they ever do? 
Hearing the wily Expedient 
Teachings, people feel delighted, 
But very few would follow 
The Guru's Final Teachings. 
With faith practice holy Dharma, 
Dear patrons and disciples! 
Without deceit or boasting, 
Humble, honest, and straightforward, 
I now tell you the truth! 
--- PAGE 670 ---
The Jetsun continued: "If one decides to practice the Dharma, he 
will learn a great deal; but if he could contemplate the Essential 
Truth for just a short time, it would help him more. If one talks 
much, the higher teaching will be overshadowed by his lower realizations. If one cannot stabilize his mind, all his seemingly good deeds 
will become self-deceiving. If one has a great attachment and desire 
for this world, arty form of Dharma he may practice will be no more 
than a Dharma-of-the-mouth. Certain people study Buddhism for pleasure, then with great pride in their learning they begin to lose faith 
in 'the great teachers of the past. As a result, they will lose the blessings. 
"Many people think they will have ample time to practice the 
Dharma, but without their notice or expectation, death suddenly descends upon them and they lose forever the chance to practice. What 
then can they do? One should turn all his Buddhist knowledge inside 
his mouth, and meditate. If one does not further his studies and meditation at the same time, but thinks that he should first learn a great 
deal before starting the actual practice [he will be completely lost], 
because knowledge is infinite, and there is no possibility of mastering it all. 
"Again, if one talks to a revered priest who is rich in Buddhist learning he will be told that there is not a single thing in Buddhism that is 
not needed. He may then acquire many, many profound teachings; 
but he does not know which one to practice. He may choose one and 
practice it, but gain no Experience at all. Then doubts and skepticism 
creep into his mind and he begins to think, 'Should I try some other 
practice? Would not another Yoga suit me better than this one?' 
Thus he will never accomplish anything. This is comparable to a man 
who studies the Soma plant1 butJorgets the basic principles and his 
original intention, like a child holding a wild flower in its hand." Milarepa then continued his admonishment in this song: 
Hearken, my faithful patrons! Even sinful 
Persons, not knowing the great power of Karma, 
Dream of achieving Liberation. 
Life wears out as days and years go by, 
Yet in pursuing pleasures 
People spend their lives. They ask, 
"Will this month or year be good?" 
Blind to life's speedy passing, 
Fools cherish foolish questions. 

--- PAGE 671 ---
The Story of Drashi Tse 
He who truly wants to practice Dharma 
Should make offerings to the Holy Ones, 
Take refuge in the Triple Gem, 
Give service to the Jetsun Guru, 
Pay respect to his parents, give · 
Alms without hoping for reward. 
He should offer help to those in need; 
He should live and act up to 
The Dharma's principles. 
Not much is needed for Buddhist practice; 
Too many vows lead to self-cheating. 
Dear patrons, try to practice what I say. 
"Your instructions are very helpful, and easy to understand," said 
the patrons. "We shall try to follow them without fail. Now please 
give us still more advice appropriate to our needs." 
Milarepa replied, "I have many good teachings to give if you can 
practice and follow them. Otherwise I see no point in doing so." 
"We will practice them. Pray by all means teach us!" 
"Well, then, these are the things you should do": 
My dear patrons, if you decide to follow 
My words and cultivate the Ultimate, 
Remember that all will die, 
And that to practice Dharma 
Is the only good way of life. 
Worldly wealth is a delusionThough much you may accumulate, 
In the end you must abandon 
All, so 'tis better to give alms. 
Affection for one's loved ones may 
Be very deep, yet one must 
Eventually leave them. 
Better 'tis to practice the Non-dual Truth. 
However strong a house is built 
Eventually it will fall. 
'Tis better far to live in no-man's land. 
Whatever food one may preserve, 
In time will be consumed. Better far 
Is it to store the food of Dharma. 

--- PAGE 672 ---
Worldly affairs cannot be trusted; 
It is better to renounce them all. 
Since foolish talk is endless 
'Tis better to shut one's mouth. 
Instructions are like the art of oiling another's 
skin; 
Better is it to rely on a proficient Guru. 
(Spiritual] Experiences resemble 
The moon's (brief] emergence from the clouds. 'Tis better 
Unceasingly to practice, 
Like an ever-flowing stream. 
These are the ten essentials 
That have risen in my mind. 
May you, Drin's men and women patrons, 
All gain good progress in the Dharma! 
Then Milarepa taught them how to take the Three Refuges, how 
to rouse the Bodhi-Mind, to dedicate (themselves], and to take the 
[Bodhisattva's] Vow. These instructions greatly inspired them with 
good spiritual thoughts. Among those attending, many learned to practice meditation, and a few even gained good Experiences. 
This is the story of Drashi Tse. 
NOTES 
1 Soma plant: "A climbing plant the juice of which was offered in libations 
to the gods; the Hindus also worshiped it on account of its intoxicating qualities." 
(Quoted from Sarat Chandra Dass' Dictionary, p. 1282.) 

--- PAGE 673 ---
THE SONG OF 
GOOD COMPANIONS 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
W
HEN the Jetsun Milarepa was staying in the Stone House of Orin, 
Tsese, Ku Ju, and many other patrons came to him for the 
Dharma. Tsese said, "Please give us some Buddhist teaching that is easy 
to understand." Milarepa replied, "Very well, lend your ears and listen carefully to this song:" 
Pray, Father Guru, supreme Marpa, 
Pray bless us and bring the Dharma to our minds. 
Dear patrons, with care listen 
For a moment to my words. 
Superior men have need of Dharma; 
Without it, they are like eagles -
Even though perched on high, 
They have but little meaning. 
Average men have need of Dharma; 
Without it, they are like tigersThough possessing greatest strength, 
They are of little value. 
Inferior men have need of Dharma; 
Wi't:hout it they are like a peddler's assesThough they carry a big load, 
It does them but little good. 
--- PAGE 674 ---
Superior women need the Dharma; 
Without it, they are like pictures on a wallThough they look very pretty, 
They have no use or meaning. 
Average women need the Dharma; 
Without it they are like little rats; 
Though they are clever at getting food, 
Their lives have but little meaning. 
Inferior women need the Dhama; 
Without it, they are just like vixensThough they be deft and cunning, 
Their deeds have little value. 
Old men need the Dharma; without 
It, they are like decaying trees. 
Growing youths the Dharma need; 
Without it, they are like yoked bulls. 
Young maidens need the Dharma; without 
It, they are but decorated cows. 
All young people need the Dharma; without it 
They are like blossoms shut within a shell. 
All children need the Dharma; without it 
They are like robbers possessed by demons. 
Without the Dharma, all one 
Does lacks meaning and purpose. 
Those who want to live with meaning 
Should practice the Buddha's teaching. 
The lady patron, Ku Ju, then said, "Revered Jetsun, you now have 
many sons and disciples, yet you still like to live as a recluse. You 
must find it a very happy life. Do you have good companions [unknown to us ]living with you?" 
"Yes, I do. Now listen to this song": 
I bow down to my Father Gurus. 
Living as a yogi recluse, 
I have one-and-twenty good companions: 
The Gurus, Patron Buddhas, and I)akinis 
Are the three for prayer; the Buddhas, Dharmas, 

--- PAGE 675 ---
The Song of Good Companions 
And Sailghas are the three for refuge; 
The Siitras, Tantras, and Sastras are 
The three for learning; the Nerves, the Drops, 
And Breathings are the three for practice 
Of the Skillful Path; Bliss, No-thought, 
And Illumination are the three 
For meditation; piety, pure 
Thought, and compassion are the three 
For the Bodhi-Path; Bha Wo, Bha Mo, 
And the Guards are the three escorts 
Through whom to conquer hindrances. 
"These things are wonderful," said Ku Ju, "but would you mind 
telling us more about them in similes?" In response, Milarepa 
sang: 
Pray bless me, all Gurus in the Lineage. 
Sitting upon the sun-moon seatl the Gurus 
Of the Succession are on my head. 
To describe them with a parable, 
They are like a string of jewels -
Blessed and joyful is my mind. 
The Three Precious Gems are my reliance -
Ever protected am I in their love. 
To describe this feeling with a simile, 
'Tis like a cherished baby 
Fed on his mother's lap 
Without fear or sorrowBlessed and joyful is my mind. 
On my right are many Bha W os 
Whose blessing dispels all my hindrances. 
To describe them with a parable, 
They are like blades revolving o'er my head 
Protecting me from all injuries -
Blessed and joyful is my mind. 
On my left arc many Oakinis, 
Blessing me with the gift of Two Accomplishments. 
To describe them with a simile, 
They are like kind mothers and sisters 

--- PAGE 676 ---
Circling round me to fulfil my wishes -
Blessed and joyful is my mind. 
Before me are the Guards of the Doctrine 
Who carry out my orders. 
To describe them with a parable, 
They are like obedient servants 
Fulfilling all my wishes -
Blessed and joyful is my mind. 
My View on Reality is perfected in three aspects,2 
With it I overwhelm the Hinayana teaching. 
To describe this with a simile, 
'Tis like a fearless lion strutting in the snowBlessed and joyful is my mind. 
My Practice of Skill andWisdom 
Is like an eagle's mighty wings 
With which I soar into the firmament. 
I fly through the sky without fear of fallingBlessed and joyful is my mind. 
My Action is full of strength and valor, 
Both distractions and drowsiness are destroyed. 
To describe this with a parable, 
'Tis like a tiger stalking through 
The woods without fear or dread -
Blessed and joyful is my mind! 
Having actualized the Trikaya, 
With ease I benefit all beings 
Through Bodies transformed. 
To describe this with a simile, 
'Tis like a golden fish that plays 
With glee in water without effortBlessed and joyful is my mind. 
Having mastered all manifestations, 
I sing little songs 
Opportune to the occasion. 
To describe this with a simile, 
'Tis like a dragon roaring in 

--- PAGE 677 ---
The Song of Good Companions 
The sky without fear or dreadBlessed and joyful is my mind. 
I am the Yogi Milarepa 
Who wanders from one retreat to another. 
To describe this with a simile, 
'Tis like the wild beasts who live 
In the mountains without fearBlessed and joyful is my mind. 
I have sung for you, in cheerful mood, 
A song with five parables and six meaningsListen carefully, men and Devas here assembled! 
Do not be misled, 
But observe your minds; 
Try to reach the state 
Of dying without regret. 
In the light of Dharma 
I wish you all good fortune! 
All those attending were satisfied and pleased. Thereafter, they 
made good efforts in virtuous deeds. Several of the young men present were accepted as servant-disciples by the Jetsun, who initiated 
them with the Pith-Instructions and then sent them to meditate. A 
few of them later became enlightened yogis. 
This is the story of Tsese, Ku Ju, and the patrons of Orin. 
NOTES 
1 Sun-moon seat (T.T.: I'li.Zlahi.gDan.): The Tantric deities are usually pictured as sitting upon a seat containg three layers: the first layer is a lotus, the second 
a sun, the third a moon symbolizing, respectively, the purity, the positive force, 
and the negative force. 
Z The translator is not certain about these three aspects, or three functions 
(T.T.: rTsal.gSum.). They probably denote the Foundation, the Path, and the Accomplishment. 

--- PAGE 678 ---
THE EVIDENCE OF 
ACCOMPLISHMENT 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
A T ONE time when the Jetsun Milarepa was staying at the Sky Castle on Red Rock Mountain Peak, some sheep-owners came from 
Orin to visit him. They said, "Please give us some instructions that 
will help our minds." The Jetsun replied, "If you want to receive 
the Dharma you had better follow my example and first renounce 
the things that are against it." 
"But what are they?" they asked. 
In answer, Milarepa sang: 
Hearken to me, friends and patrons! 
An act that has no meaning, 
Unnatural pretense, and fearless empty talk, 
Are three things against the Dharma 
Which I have renounced. 'Tis good 
For you to do the same. 
The place that in~ates one, the group 
That stirs up quarrels, the status 
By hypocrisy maintained, 
Are three things against the Dharma 
Which I have renounced. 'Tis good 
For you to do the same. 
The Guru with little knowledge, 
The disciple with small faith, 
The brother who keeps little discipline, 
Are three things against the Dharma 
--- PAGE 679 ---
The Evidence of Accomplishment 
Which I have renounced. 'Tis good 
For you to do the same. 
The wife who always complains, 
The sons who e'er need punishment, 
The servant who ever swaggers, 
Are three things against the Dharma 
Which I have renounced. 'Tis good 
For you to do the same. 
After hearing this song, the patrons all went home filled with inspiration and faith. 
At another time Milarepa was blown off a high cliff by a strong 
gale of wind. His body hit a tree in falling. Just as the disciples, 
filled with apprehension, were wondering [if he were badly hurt], 
Milarepa appeared and showed them that no injury had been done. 
Then he sang: 
Blown off a cliff by a strong gale, 
I was hit by a cruel tree 
And gripped by pain unbearable, 
But the I)akinis healed me. 
Again WJe day, Milarepa appeared to fall from the top of a cliff . 
. [From below] the disciples saw this happen and immediately dashed 
to the spot to receive his falling body. But when they reached it, 
Milarepa was already seated there, bursting with laughter. They asked 
him what had happened. In answer, he sang: 
Stretching eagle-wings of the Non-dual, 
I flew to the top of Red Rock Cliff. 
To fall, is to fall to the bottom of an abyss; 
To play, is to play jokes on my disciples; 
To liberate, is to liberate from Sarpsara and NirvaQa; 
To receive, is to receive the Bliss-Void of self. 
Again one day, as Milarepa was sitting on the edge of a high cliff, 
a girl came by. Seeing him, she cried out, "Do not sit there, do not 

--- PAGE 680 ---
sit there! That is too dangerous!" Ignoring her warning, he remained 
where he was. Then the earth beneath him began to slip and trickle 
down [the cliff]. As a huge lump of earth was about to fal_l, Milarepa made a Mudra-of-Threat, and flew away. In the meantime the 
disciples thought that he must have been seriously injured and rushed 
to the scene. But [when they arrived] they found him sitting there 
at his ease, singing this song: 
This body is like a flower. 
From the dangerous Red Rock 
The devils tried to grab it, 
But the Oakinis bore it safel;f. 
No devil again will try. 
The disciples then asked, "How, Revered Jetsun, can you fall from 
a high cliff and hit a tree without being injured?" Milarepa replied, 
"My body has become the Rainbow Body, and my Kle~as, Wisdom; 
having realized the truth of Non-being I shall never die. Since I 
have conquered the Eight Worldly Desires, all the Four Demons have 
been disgraced and frustrated by me." "Do you consider that you have 
now completely conquered the Four Demons?" they asked. "Yes," he 
replied, "You may say so. Hereafter, for the next thirteen generations, 
followers of my Lineage will be immune from the intrusions of the 
Four Demons." 
One day a Tantric yogi from Weu came to visit the Jetsun. Sevan 
Repa asked him, "What kind of accomplished beings are to be found 
in W eu?" The yogi answered, "We have accomplished yogis whom 
the Non-men serve and provide with food." "According to my standards," replied the Jetsun, "These cannot be considered as accomplished 
beings." Sevan Repa then asked, "Do you, Revered Jetsun, also receive offerings from the Non-men?" "Yes, I receive them in this way": 
Inexhaustible as the Treasury 
Of Heaven, Samadhi is my servant; 
Oakinis prepare my food and drink; 
But this is not evidence 
Of an accomplished being. 
The yogi retorted, "But in W eu we do have yogis who can see 
the Patron Buddhas." In reply, Milarepa sang: 

--- PAGE 681 ---
The Evidence of Accomplishment 
To him who sees the mind's nature 
And dispels the mists of ignorance, 
The Oakinis show their faces;· 
Yet, in the Real Realm, 
There is nothing to be seen. 
Without deliberate "non-observation" in one's mind, 
All Dharmas rise and are illuminated by themselves. 
This is preached by all Oakinis. 
The profoundest teaching can be had 
Only from one's Guru, with whom all 
Supreme and Worldly Accomplishments 
Will be obtained and all good wishes 
Fulfilled in this very life; 
This is assured by all Oakinis. 
But even all this is not evidence 
Of an accomplished being. 
The yogi asked again, "With what simile would you describe the 
mind's nature?" In answer, Milarepa sang: 
This non-arising Mind-Essence cannot 
Be described by metaphors or signs; 
This Mind-Essence that cannot 
Be extinguished is oft described 
By fools, but those who realize 
1?, explain it by itself. 
Devoid of "symbolized" and "symbolizer," 
It is a realm beyond all words and thought. 
How wondrous is the blessing of my Lineage! 
Hearing this song, the yogi was awakened from his previous misconceptions, and was confirmed with an irrevocable faith toward the 
Jetsun, who accepted him as a servant-disciple and initiated him with 
the Instructions. Through practice he eventually became an outstanding and enlightened yogi. 
This is the story of conquering the Four Demons, and of Milarepa's 
interview with the Tantric yogi. 

--- PAGE 682 ---
THE MIRACLES AND THE 
LAST ADMONISHMENT 
Obeisance to all Gurus 
ONCE when the Jetsun Milarepa was staying at Chu Bar, his body 
became invisible to certain people. Others saw him [sitting still 
and) neither eating food nor engaging in any activity. But everyone 
noticed that at times he laughed, and at others he cried. Shiwa Aui 
then said to him, "Yesterday I could not see you. Some people could, 
but they saw you sitting still [as if) in Samadhi. What were you doing then, and why did you first laugh, and then cry, without any 
apparent reason?" The Jetsun replied, "Since yesterday many people 
have been attending my discourses. When I saw their happiness I 
laughed, when I saw their sufferings, I wept." 
"Please tell us all about it." 
"If you want to hear this story, you should now prepare a Mai:tc;lala 
offering." 
This was done, and after the ceremony the Jetsun said, "Yesterday 
I went out to preach the Dharma to all sentient beings in the Six 
Realms. Seeing the joys of Devas and human beings and those who 
do good deeds, I laughed; but when I saw the miseries in the three 
lower Realms, and those who indulged in evil deeds, I wept." Shiwa 
Aui then asked, "Please tell us what are the joys and miseries that 
. sentient beings in the Six Realms experience? Especially, please tell 
us, what are the pleasures that the Devas enjoy?" The Jetsun replied, 
"Do not be fascinated by the pleasures of heavenly beings; they also 
have miseries like these": 
I pray to the Gracious Ones. Pray embrace 
All sentient beings in your blessing! 
--- PAGE 683 ---
The Miracles and the Last Admonishment 
The pleasures enjoyed by men and Devas 
Are like the amusements of the Heavenly Yak1 
It may low like thunder, 
But what good can it do? 
(Swooning in a state of trance], 
The Devas in the Four Formless Heavens2 
Cannot distinguish good from evil. 
Because their minds are dull and callous, 
Insensible, they have no feeling. 
In unconscious stupefaction, 
They live many kalpas in a second. 
What a pity that know it not! 
Alas, these Heavenly births 
Have neither sense nor value. 
When they think vicious thoughts 
They start to fall again. 
As to the reason for their fall 
[Scholars], with empty words, have dried 
Their mouths in explanations. 
In the Heavens of Form,3 the Devas of 
The five higher and twelve lower Realms can 
Only live until their merits are exhausted. 
Their virtues are essentially conditional, 
And their Karmas basically Saqtsaric. 
Those Dharma practicers subject to worldly 
Desires, and those "great yogis" wrapped in stillness, 
Have yet to purify their minds; 
Huge may be their claims and boasts, 
But seeds of habitual thoughts 
In their minds are deeply rooted. 
After a long-dormant time, 
Evil thoughts will-rise again. 
When their merits and fortunes are consumed, 
They to the lower Realms will go once more! 
If I explain the horrors of a Deva's 
Death, you will be disheartened and perplexed. 
Bear this in your mind and ever meditate! 
--- PAGE 684 ---
In a sad mood, the disciples asked the Jetsun to preach for them 
the sufferings of the Asuras. In response, he sang: 
I pray to the Gurus and I;>akinis -
Pray bless and enable all 
To rouse the Bodhi-Mind. 
Great are Asuras' sufferings. 
Misled by malignant thoughts, 
To all they bring misfortunes. 
Knowing not their true Self-mind, 
Their deeds are self-deceiving, 
Their feelings coarse, their senses crude. 
Deeming all to be their foes, 
Not even for moment 
Can they know the trutl\, Evil 
By nature, they can hardly bear a loss; harder 
Is benevolence for them to cherish. Blinded 
By the Karma-of-Belligerence, 
They can never take good counsel. 
Ill nature such as this is caused 
By seeking pleasures for oneself 
And bearing harmful thoughts toward others. 
Pride, favoritism, vanity, and hatred 
Are the evil Karmic forces 
That drag one to a lower birth, 
Making sinful deeds more easy. 
Ripening Karma brings 
An instinctive hatred; 
Failing to distinguish right from wrong, 
They hardly can be helped by any means. 
Bear this my disciples, in your minds, 
And meditate with perseverance all your lives! 
Shiwa Aui said, "Now please tell us about the sufferings of human 
beings." In answer, Milarepa sang: 
I bow down at the feet of Jetsun MarpaThe Buddha as a man disguised. 
We human beings are endowed with power 

--- PAGE 685 ---
The Miracles and the Last Admonishment 
To do good or evil deeds; 
This is because our body 
Is made of all Six Elements.• 
You junior Repas who desire to be great scholars 
Should know the "kernel and shell" of Buddhism, 
Lest learning lead you only to confusion. 
Knowing not the root of mind, useless 
Is it to meditate· for years. 
Without sincerity and willingness, 
Rich offerings have no real meaning. 
Without giving impartial aid to all, 
Patronage of one's favorite is wrong. 
Knowing not the right counsel for each man, 
Blunt talk will only bring trouble and discord. 
He who knows the appropriate way 
To help men of diverse dispositions, 
Can use expedient words for kind and fruitful 
Purposes. He who knows little about himself 
Can harm many by his ignorance. 
When good will arises in one's mind, stones, 
Trees, and earth all become seeds of virtue. 
Again, an over-punctilious person knows not how to 
relax; 
A gluttonous dog knows not what is hunger; 
A brazen Guru knows not what is fear. 
Rich men are wretched creatures with money, 
Poor men are wretched creatures without money. 
Alas, with or without money, both are miserable! 
Happiness will come, dear children, 
If you can practice the Dharma. Remember, 
Then, my words and practice with perseverance. 
"It is very true that human beings suffer like this," agreed the disciples. "Now please tell us about the sufferings in the Three Miserable 
Realms, even though just to mention them may be distressing. Also, to 
spur our spiritual efforts, please preach for us the causes of Hell and 
its woe." In response, the Jetsun sang: 
I pray to my Guru-protectors, pray 

--- PAGE 686 ---
Dispel fear of the Miserable Realms. 
Those who for meat and blood 
Slaughter living beings, 
Will in the Eight Hot Hells be burned. 
But if they can remember the good Teachings, 
They soon will be emancipated. 
Ruthless robbers who strike and kill, 
Wrongly eating others' food 
While clinging to their own with greed, 
Will fall into the Eight Cold Hells. 
Yet, if they hold no wrong views against the Dharma 
It is said that the time for deliverance will come. 
[The Holy Scriptures] also say 
Whene' er the denizens of Hell 
Recall the name of Buddha, 
At once they will be delivered. 
Ever repeating sinful deeds means 
Dominance by vice and evil Karma. 
Fiends filled with the craving for pleasures, 
Murder even their parents and Gurus, 
Rob the Three Gems of their treasure, 
Revile and accuse falsely the Precious 
Ones, and condemn the Dharma as untrue; 
In the Hell-that-Never-Ceases5 
These evildoers will be burned; 
Far from them, alas, is Liberation. 
This, my sons, will certainly distress you, 
So into the Dharma throw your hearts 
And devote yourselves to meditation! 
The Repas said, "Merely to hear these horrible things so frightens 
and distresses us that we wonder how anyone can actually undergo 
them! Nevertheless, for the benefit of sentient beings, please tell us 
now about the sufferings of the Hungry Ghosts." In reply, Milarepa 
sang: 
I bow down to all Gurus. Pray 
Protect the denizens of Hell 
From fears with your compassion! 

--- PAGE 687 ---
The Miracles and the LAst Admonishment 
Filled with the urge to kill themselves 
Those in Hell cannot escape from fear. 
Hungry Ghosts, seeing all forms as foes, 
Run from each successive terror. Wild beasts 
Fight and eat each other. 
Who of them is to blame? 
The sufferings of Hungry 
Ghosts grow from their stinginess. 
Like a rat is he who fails 
To give alms when he is rich, 
Begrudges food when he has plenty, 
Gives no goods to others, but checks 
Them over, counts, and stores themDiscontented day and night. 
At the time of death he sees 
That his hard-earned wealth will be 
Enjoyed by others. Caught in 
Bardo by the agony of loss, 
He lives the life of a Hungry Ghost. 
Due to his delusive thoughts 
He suffers thirst and hunger. 
When he sees his goods enjoyed by others 
He is torrnentated by avarice and hate. 
Again and again will he thus fall down [to Hell]. 
I, the great Yogi of Strength, 
Now sing for you the woes 
Of Hungry Ghosts. Dear sons 
And disciples here assembled, think on 
My words and meditate with perseverance! 
Shiwa Aui then requested, "Now please tell us of the sufferings of 
animals." Whereupon Milarepa sang: 
I bow down to all holy Gurus. Pray protect 
All animals from fear with your compassion! 
Animals, alas, are ignorant and benighted; 
Most stupid men will incarnate among them. 
Blind and enslaved by evil Karma, 
The ignorant know not Dharma's Truth. 
Blind both to evil and to virtue, 

--- PAGE 688 ---
They quickly waste their lives away. 
Unable to reason and use symbols, 
They act like blind automatons; 
Unable to distinguish wrong from right, 
Like maniacs, they do much wrong. 
Some people even say 'tis good 
[To be an animal], 
Since it does not regret or repent. 
Alas, how foolish is this thought! 
Then, all stupid life-takers 
Will incarnate as beasts; 
The fools who know not right from wrong, 
And those who harbor vicious thoughts, 
Will incarnate as common brutes. 
It is hard for me to describe 
Their Karmas, but think on my words 
And cultivate your minds. 
The Repas again asked, "Did you preach the Dharma for sentient 
beings in only one place, or did you go to different regions in the 
Six Realms to preach?" 
"In accordance with the different capacities, Karmas, and needs of 
sentient beings," replied the Jetsun, "I manifested myself in different 
forms at different places to preach the appropriate Dharma for them." 
The monks, disciples, patrons, and attendants in the assembly were 
all deeply impressed with a fear of the great sufferings of Saq1sara and 
the lower Realms. With a greater aspiration toward the Dharma, they 
all exerted themselves in the renunciation of sins and the practice of 
good deeds. 
Af another time, Milarepa flew up into the sky, transforming his 
body from one to many, and then retracted them back into one. 
·Also he preached various Dharmas in an invisible form, and performed 
many other miracles. 
When Sevan Repa saw Milarepa flying he also held his breath and 
tried to fly; but all he could do was to walk above the ground. Commenting on this, Milarepa said, "If one has not yet practiced as J 
have, by venerating my Guru, respecting my brothers, renouncing 
Saq1sara, pitying sentient beings, and practicing devotion with great 
diligence, he should never expect to perform these miracles easily and 

--- PAGE 689 ---
The Miracles and the Last Admonishment 
spontaneously. My son-disciples, 'if you have not yet completed these 
virtuous deeds to suffice the cause [of the Supreme Accomplishment], 
you should never expect to attain it too easily." Whereupon he sang: 
If there be neither Karma nor the required conditions, 
In this life one should not hope to attain Buddhahood. 
He who cannot put all his trust in his Guru 
Should not expect care and blessing in return. 
He who cannot satisfy disciples 
Should not expect to become a Guru. 
He who cannot master his own mind 
Should have no hope of leading others. 
He who cannot hold the Lineage tradition 
Should not aspire towards the Signs and Siddhis. 
He who cannot practice diligently 
Should not have wishful thoughts for Buddhahood. 
He who has not cut the bonds of dualism 
Should not expect an infinite Compassion. 
He who cannot sever the chain of clinging to 
An entity should not expect an all-free View. 
He who has not seen Self-mind in nakedness 
Should not expect to behold the True Essence. 
He who knows not how to cleanse impurities 
Should not expect unceasing Experience. 
He who cannot destroy attachment within 
[Himself), should not expect relaxed Six Senses. 
He who is not expert in Samadhi 
Should not expect the great Omnipresence. 
He who has yet to uproot subtle hopes and fears 
Should never expect the Trikaya to attain. 
He who cannot flawlessly observe moral rules 
Should never expect immediate happiness. 
He who has not completed the Two Provisions 
Should never expect to be a revered Buddha. 
He who cannot obey orders should not hope 
For popularity among his brothers. 
He who has yet to master Self-awareness 
Should not expect freedom from ghosts and Devas. 
He who has yet to master all appearances 
Should not expect to govern the Three Lokas. 
He who has yet to transcend the mundane level 
Should not cherish the thought of "no good and no evil." 
A yogi who heads a monastery 

--- PAGE 690 ---
Should not neglect discipline and virtue. 
He who does not understand the stages 
Of the Experiences should not try 
To prove and check those of gifted disciples. 
He who has not fully practiced the Pith-Instructions 
Should not expect in Bardo to gain Liberation. 
He who cannot observe the precepts in perfect order 
Should ne'er expect his wishes to be easily fulfilled. 
He who cannot observe well the Samaya rules 
Should n'er expect ()akinis and Guards to like him. 
He who has not obtained the Key Instructions 
From logic and the Holy Scriptures 
Should not neglect the words and symbols. 
He who possesses not the Five Miraculous 
Powers, should not make predictions from external signs. 
He who has not stablized the Experience, 
Should never neglect to cultivate his mind. 
On another occasion, the Jetsun's body became invisible to all who 
came before him. Some saw light, and some a glowing lamp shining 
on his bed; others beheld a rainbow, water, a bar of gold, or a whirl· 
wind; and still others could not see anything. Then Repa Shiwa Aui 
asked the Jetsun what were the meanings and reasons behind all these 
phenomena. Milarepa answered him in this song: 
I pray to all Gurus -
Pray enable me to change into many forms. 
Listen Shiwa Aui, my dear son, 
Who is as good as Rechungpa. 
Since I have mastered Earth, 
Earth of myself is now a part; 
Since I have mastered Water,· 
Water of myself is now a part; 
Since I have mastered Fire, 
Fire of myself is now a part; 
Since I have mastered Air, 
Air of myself is now a part. 
Since I have mastered the Void of space, 
All manifestations in the Cosmos 
Have merged and are identified with me. 

--- PAGE 691 ---
The Miracles and the Last Admonishment 
Since I have mastered the projection of Pral)a-Mind, 
I can transform my body into any form. 
Dear son, if you have faith 
In the Accomplished Jetsuns, 
You will indeed be blessed 
And your wishes fulfilled. 
Again one day the Jetsun transformed himself into a different body 
before each of his disciples and faithful patrons, to preach the Dharma 
to them. Also he conjured a child playing with clay beside each 
preacher. In short, he performed many miracles in inconceivable varieties. The disciples asked him his reasons for doing so. He replied, "I 
am a yogi who sees his own Self-mind, thus I can change and manipulate all manifestations in the outer world to any form and in any 
manner I please. Also, I can project and multiply all objects from my 
mind and bring them back to it again." Then he sang: 
I bow down to all Gurus. 
When my body has the Guru's blessing, 
It can work many miracles 
And many transformations. 
When my mouth receives the Guru's 
Blessing, it can sing lyric songs 
And give Pith-Instructions. 
When my mind receives the Guru's blessing 
It realizes and is the Buddha. 
Fire cannot bum nor water drown me; 
Walking like an elephant, I act 
And dance with great confidence. 
With their different states of mind, 
The faithful see my various forms 
And hear my different preachings; 
By this they will gain Liberation. 
But impure men with evil Karmas 
Cannot even see my body. 
They must suffer for their sinsEven Buddha cannot help them. 

--- PAGE 692 ---
Dear sons, try with diligence to practice 
The Dharma. I could talk on without end, 
[But what better advice could I give you?] 
Alas, pity all sinful men! Seeing them 
Deprived of a chance for Liberation, 
And bearing all sorrows, my heart is most 
Distressed and troubled! 
Oh friends, let us try 
Firmly to practice Qrir devotion. 
Let us forget all worldly things, 
For the next life preparing! 
Hearing this song, all the son-disciples were inspired with great joy. 
[Thus, and in this manner, the Jetsun Milarepa] caused the Buddhist religion to dawn in Tibet, and brought temporal and Ultimate 
happiness to sentient beings. Having unified forms and Mind, and consolidated the Main and the Ensuing Samadhis, the great Master Yogi, 
Milarepa, benefited sentient beings through his miraculous powers and 
melodious songs. These songs were cherished, remembered, and recorded in writing by his heart-son disciples. The major part of Mila· 
repa's songs that are well known in the human world, is now compiled in this volume. It is befitting to state here that to collect all'his 
innumerable songs would be a task quite beyond our reach. 
This is the story of Milarepa performing miracles to inspire his disciples, and the end of the last series [of the Mila Grubum]. 
In the foregoing chapters three groups of stories,8 serving as a good 
account of the Eight Deeds7 of [the Jetsun Milarepa] through which 
he propagated the Practice Transmission in Tibet and bestowed blessing on sentient beings, are related with complete details. 
(The End) 
NOTES 
I Heavenly Yak: a legendary yak said to dwell in Heaven (T.T.: 11-Ia.gYag.). 
Z The Four Formless Heavens, or Realms (T.T.: gZugs.Med.sKye.mChed. 

--- PAGE 693 ---
The Miracles and the lAst Admonishment 
bShi.), are: (1) the Realm of Infinite Space; (2) the Realm of Infinite Consciousness; (3) the Realm of Nothingness; and (4) the Realm of Neither Consciousness 
nor Non-Consciousness. These Formless Heavens are considered to be the highest 
Heavens in Saf!lsara; only those who have attained very advanced Samadhis can be 
born in these Realms. However, accordin~ to Buddhism, a birth in these Heavens 
will not bring one to Liberation, hence it is only a waste of time. 
3 Heavens of Form (T.T.: gZugs.Khms.Kyi.lHa.): In this Realm, it is said, 
there are 17 Heavens. They are: 
(1) Brahmapari~dya, (2) Brahmapurohita, (3) Mahabrahma. (These three 
belong to the Heavens of the First Dhyana.) 
(4) Parittabha, (5) Aprama~abha, (6) Abhasvara. (These three belong to 
the Heavens of the Second Dhyana.) 
(7) Parittasubha, (8) Aprama~a~ubha, (9) Subhak}tsna. (These three belong to the Heavens of the Third Dhyana.) 
(10) Anabhraka, (11) 
Pu~yaprasava, (12) Brhatphala, (13) Avrha, (14) 
Atapa, (15) Sudrsa, (16) Sudarlana, and (17) Mahamahdvara. 
(These eight belong to the Heavens of the Fourth Dhyana.) 
4 Six Elements: the elements of earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. 
In comparison with sentient beings in the Heavens, human beings are said to possess 
more elements. For example, in the Heaven of Form, sentient beings do not have 
the elements of earth, water, and fire; and in the Formless Heavens, sentient beings do not have the elements of earth, water, fire, air, and space, because they possess only the element of consciousness. 
5 The·Hell-that-Never-Ceases (T.T.: mNar.Med.dMyal.Wa.): It is said that 
denizens of this Hell suffer unceasing torment, whereas in other hells, temporary 
relief of pain is possible. 
~ According to the compiler, this book, the Mila Grubum, consists of three 
groups of stories. The first group of stories are those of Milarepa's conquering and 
conversion of the malignant demons- Stories 1 through 8; the second group are 
those of Milarepa and his well·endowed disciples- Stories 9 through 44; and the 
third group are those of various categories- Stories 45 through 61. See the last 
paragraphs of Story 8 and of Story 44. 
7 The Eight Deeds (T.T.: mDsad.Pa.brGyad.): These are the well·known 
Eight Deeds of Buddha, performed in the eight phases of Buddha's life. They are: 
(1) descending from the Tu~ita Heaven; (2) entering His mother's womb; (3) 
birth; ( 4) renouncing the world; ( 5) conGuering the demons; (6) attaining the Ultimate Enlightenment; (7) setting the Wheel-of-Dharma in motion (preaching); 
and (8) NirvaQa. 

--- PAGE 694 ---
On His two mighty wings 
Of Wisdom and of Skill, 
He flew to the sky of Supreme 
Accomplishment, with a mind 
Priceless and pure as Heaven's. 
He was the Lord Jetsun Mila 
Who danced, and sang with joy 
In a drama of Totality. 
With a mind firm as a diamond 
COLOPHON 
He raised the flag of the Two Siddhis. 
To Him, the changeless Vajra, 
With a laughing voice that 
Rolls the world and heaven, 
I pay sincerest homage! 
From reading His life story, one will profit; 
From hearing His name, one will be freed from pain; 
Bestowed will be the power of 
Achieving Buddhahood this time. 
To those Who remember and venerate Him, 
He is the wish-granting jewel, the matchless 
treasure-opener, 
The Great Sorcerer, a descendent from a brave Lineage. 
Any man of sense who reads his stories 
Will be inspired with a wish to follow liim. 
Those who read, hear, think, and touch 
This book will all gain great profit. 
With this in mind, to propagate the Dharma 
The faithful Chueji Jangtse has arranged the woodblocks 
For publication of a late edition of this book. 
By this merit may all living 
Beings follow Milarepa, 
Till they arrive at Buddhahood. 
May all men who find this book, ever be born 
--- PAGE 695 ---
Colophon 
In a Lineage of the Supreme Vehicle. 
May they all meet a perfect Guru, rely 
On him, and cherish him like their own eyes -
As Milarepa once did in his lifetime. 
[By the merit of publishing this book], 
May all Buddhist Schools, Sutra or Tantra, 
Scripture or Devotional, prosper and spread afar. 
May all religious leaders everywhere live long. 
May all preachers of all Sects agree 
With each other in the light of Dharma. 
May all Buddhist patrons gain prosperity 
And power. May all men complete 
Their preparatory work and soon 
Enter the one supreme Path of Vajrayana! 
In the Two-in-One Palace of :Oakinis, 
May they soon become Buddhas of the Ten Perfections! 
By the earnest request of the benevolent practicer (sGrub. Pa.Po.), 
I, Monk Jhambar Rolbi Lhodroe, have written these auspicious wishes. 
Mav all of our good Vows, both temporal and eternal, soon be fulfilled. 

--- PAGE 697 ---
APPENDIX 

--- PAGE 699 ---
THE"HUNDRED 
THOUSAND SONGS OF 
MILAREPA," ITS ORIGIN, 
BACKGROUND, FUNCTION, 
AND TRANSLATION 
by CARMA c. c. CHANG 
T
HE Mila Grubum,l or the "Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa," 
is perhaps the most outstanding masterpiece of Tibetan literature. Its 
rich contents, fascinating stories, and characteristic style, all revealed 
through a simple yet graphic expression, have capitvated the hearts and 
minds pf Tibetans from all walks of life for the past eight centuries, 
providing them with solace and a source of inexhaustible joy and in· 
spiration. It has been read as the biography of a saint, a guide book' 
for devotions, a manual of Buddhist Yoga, a volume of songs and 
poems, and even a collection of Tibetan folklore and fairy tales. 
In introducing this beloved, holy book of Tibet, I have naturally 
been concerned lest I do an injustice to it by possible misrepresentation -even profanation. I am inclined to believe that a proper introduction to a book of this kind should adhere as closely as possible to 
an "indigenous style," for none could know better or feel more intimate with the subject matter of the Mila Grubum than the owners 
of the book themselves- the Tibetan people who have inherited it 
and have lived with it for centuries. With this in mind I present 
this book to readers under three topics: (1) the life and contribution 
of Milarepa; (2) the central teaching of Tibetan Tantrism; and (3) 
the translation. 
THE LIFE AND CONTRIBUTION OF MILAREPA 
Milarepa, the great Buddhist saint and poet of Tibet, was born 
A.D. 10522 and died in 1135. His youth was full of misfortunes and 
sorrows. Following the early death of his father, his relatives treacherously and shamelessly seized his vast patrimony. After many years of 
hard labor, poverty, and humiliation, he was finally persuaded by his 
--- PAGE 700 ---
APPENDIX 
mother to take revenge upon the wrongdoers through magic, for they 
were much too powerful to be vanquished by ordinary means. He succeeded in obtaining, through his sincere devotion and service to a 
teacher of sercery, a powerful spell, by means of which he assassinated 
many of his relatives and wrought great havoc on his native valley by 
destroying the harvest with hailstorms. 
Not long after, he repented of his sinful deeds, and determined to 
seek .salvation by devoting the rest of his life to the practice of the 
Dharma. Despite the fact that meanwhile he was initiated into the profound teachings of the "Great Perfection" (T.T.: rDsogs.Pa.Chen.Po.) 
by an enlightened lama, the shadows of sin and pride still made it impossible for him to make any spiritual progress. The lama then sent him 
to the famous Guru- Marpa the Translator- who had just returned 
from India after many years of study and practice there. 
The day before Milarepa arrived, both Marpa and his wife dreamed 
of goddesses who prophesied the coming of a disciple who would one 
day become the greatest teacher of Tibet, bringing salvation to in· 
numerable sentient beings, bestowing Enlightenment upon countless 
Dharma devotees, and glorifying the immaculate doctrine of Buddhism. 
Perceiving Milarepa's past sins and his great potential capacities, 
and wishing to clear away all hindrances that might otherwise block 
his spiritual growth, Marpa relentlessly put him on trial by imposing 
upon him severe mental and physical penances. Milarepa was ordered 
to build, single-handed, one house after another on a desolate mountain, then to tear them down again for no apparent reason. In return 
for long years of service, devotion, and obedience to Marpa, Milarepa 
received only humiliation and unjustified harsh treatment. At last he 
was accepted as a disciple, and rewarded with the longed-for instructions. Then, for eleven continuous months, he meditated alone in a 
cave, where he finally attained direct Realization and an initial achievement on the Path to Bodhi. 
By this time, Milarepa had been separated from his family for many 
years. One day, while meditating in the cave, he fell asleep and 
dreamed that he returned home and saw the bones of his mother lying 
in the ruins of his house. He then thought that she must have died 
during his long absence. He saw his only sister as a vagabond beggar, 
his house and fields deserted and overgrown with a tangle of rank 
weeds. He awoke weeping bitterly, calling the names of his mother and 
sister, his pillow wet with tears. 
· 
Stricken with grief and longing to see his mother, he left Marpa and 
went back to his home village, where all the premonitions of his 
dream were confirmed. Witnessing this painful human existence help-

--- PAGE 701 ---
APPENDIX 
lessly and futilely consumed in fleeting evanescence, an anguish of desire to renounce the world wrung his heart. He made a solemn vow that 
he would meditate on a remote mountain uninterruptedly until he 
reached the Ultimate Enlightenment. 
This vow he kept. For twelve consecutive years he meditated alone 
in a cave, living on nothing but nettles, until his whole body be--
came greenish in hue. As a consequence of this consistent effort, he 
finaliy earned his reward- the realization of Ultimate Enlightenement. 
After this, his fame gradually spread over the whole of Tibet and Nepal. In his later years he was called by all Tibetans, "Jetsun Milarepa" 
("Holy Milarepa"), and is regarded to this day as indisputably the 
greatest poet, yogi, and saint in Tibetan history. 
Milarepa had a fine voice, and loved to sing. Even when he was a boy, 
he was regarded by his countrymen as an excellent singer of folksongs. Sainthood and Enlightenment only made him sing more frequently and joyfully than before. When his patrons and disciples made 
a request, or put a question to him, or a dispute arose, he answered 
them not in dull prose but in freely flowing poems or lyric songs 
composed spontaneously. No one knows how many songs or "poems" 
he "composed" in his lifetime. Tibetans believe there were close to 
one hundred thousand. This claim may not be an exaggeration, if we 
consider that throughout almost half of his life Milarepa used songs 
to communicate his ideas in his teaching and conversation. Even if we 
discount this seemingly exaggerated claim, we must nevertheless admit 
that he was an extraordinarily prolific "composer" of songs. For him 
there was no difficulty in creating a new song at any moment, for, in 
the genius of his enlightened mind, the fountain of inspiration was 
inexhaustible. 
In his songs, Milarepa has left us a treasury of valuable information on his personal yogic experience, and advice and instruction concerning the practical problems of meditation. To serious yogis and 
Dharma practitioners, they are indeed a most precious guide. Speculative and scholarly writings are abundant in Buddhist literature, but 
rarely can one find a volume having such life and vitality, and generating· a magnetic force bright and powerful enough to dispel the 
darkness of grief and bring hope and joy to all. 
Unlike many religious leaders, who exerted themselves in various 
tasks for the creation of their new Orders, Milarepa never tried to 
build a temple, form a group, or set up an organization of any sort, 
but faithfully followed his Guru's injunctions by leading the life of a 
true mendicant yogi in the remote mountains, the life of a saint-troubadour, wandering from place to place to preach the holy Dharma through 

--- PAGE 702 ---
APPENDIX 
his songs. Also, differing from those pedantic scholars and dogmatic 
Tantric yogis who either adhered to ideas and words or to rites and 
forms, Milarepa cast away all erudite Buddhist studies and cumberso~e Tantric rituals, and marched directly toward Buddhahood by 
way of simple understanding and persistent practice. As a result, his 
teachings were also more precise, direct, and simple than those of conventional Tantrism, and well deserve being called the quintessential 
teqchings of practical Buddhism. Though Milarepa was ridiculed by a 
number of jealous scholars of his time as being an ignorant hermit who 
knew nothing about Buddhism, history has proved that his teachings 
were far superior and more influential than those of any learned Budhist scholar of his day. 
Through the illustration of his own life, Milarepa set for all Budhists an example of the perfect Bodhisattva, and a model of the incorruptible life of a genuine practitioner of Buddhist Tantrism. His life 
is an unmistakable testimony to the unity and interdependency of all 
Buddhist teachings- Theravada, Mahayana, and Vajrayana- for Buddahood is not attainable if any of the three are lacking. He made it 
clear to all that poverty is not a kind of deprivation, but rather a 
necessary way of emanicpating oneself from the tyranny of material 
possessions; that Tantric practice by no means implies indulgence and 
laxity, but hard labor, strict discipline, and steadfast perseverance; that 
without resolute renunciation and uncompromising discipline, as Guatama Buddha Himself stressed, all the sublime ideas and dazzling images depicted in Mahayana and Tantric Buddhism are no better than 
magnificent illusions. 
Milarepa was one of the very few Buddhist saints whose transmitted 
teachings have given birth to more enlightened beings than have any 
of the Mahayana Buddhist Schools, except Ch'an Buddhism in China. 
Hui Neng, the founder of Ch'an, was perhaps the only figure in 
Buddhist history whose influence and contribution can, in various aspects, rival those of Milarepa. 
These two great sages also had many other things in common. They 
both laid stress on actual practice and direct Realization, and in both 
instances their teachings were characterized by extreme simplicity and 
straightforwardness. But the teaching of Milarepa seems to be more 
thorough, complete, and "advanced" than that of Hui Neng because, 
unlike Hui Neng, who put all his emphasis on the Prajiiaparamita, Milarepa accentuated all the essential teachings of Buddhism. In stressing 
the importance of the Dharmakaya, both are alike; but as to the teaching of the other two Kayas - the manifestation, and the dynamic force 
of Buddhahood - Milarepa's seems to be the more thorough. Thus, 
through his life-example, Milarepa preached and demonstrated the 

--- PAGE 703 ---
APPENDIX 
unity and interdependency of all the essential teachings of Buddhism. 
Among his many important contributions, this is perhaps the greatest 
and the most unique one of all. 
Those who have a serious interest in Milarepa's life and work should 
also read another important Tibetan work, "The Jetsun Milarepa 
Khabum," or "Namthar" -
"The Biography of Milarepa," translated 
by the late Lama Kazi Dawa-Samdup and edited with an Introduction 
and annotations by·Dr. W. Y. Evans-\Ventz, under the title, "Tibet's 
Great Yogi, Milarepa," (Oxford University Press, 1951). A careful 
study of this celebrated book will not only broaden the reader's understanding of Milarepa's life and work, but will bring to him a broader comprehension of the spirit and teaching of Tibetan Buddhism. 
THE CENTRAL TEACHING OF TIBETAN TANTRISM 
A better understanding and deeper appreciation of the songs of Milarepa will be reached if a good knowledge of Buddhism in general, 
and a fair grasp of Tibetan Tantrism in particular, is acquired. In 
orclh to help those who may not have had such a background, a brief 
summary of the essential teachings of Tibetan Tantrism is given 
in the following pages. Information on general Buddhism is not included, since this may be obtained from sources easily available to all. 
It goes without saying that this brief summary is less than adequate to 
represent the vast and comprehensive contents of the Tibetan Tantra. 
One cannot expect, therefore, to glean from these brief lines more 
than a hint of the essential, underlying principles. 
Tibetan Tantrism is a form of practical Buddhism abounding in 
methods and techniques for carrying out the practice of all the Ma* 
hayana teachings. In contrast to the "theoretical" forms of Buddhism, 
such as Sautrantika, Vaibha~ika, Madhayamika, Yogacara, Hua Yen, 
Tien Tai, etc., Buddhist Tantrism lays most of its stress on practice 
and Realization, rather than on philosophical speculations. Its central 
principles and practices may be summarized as follows: 
1. That all existence and manifestation can be found in one's experience, that this experience is within one's own mind, and that Mind 
is the source and creator of all things. 
2. That Mind is an infinitely vast, unfathomably deep complex of 
marvels, its immensity and depth being inaccessible to the uninitiated. 
3. That he who has come to a thorough realization and perfect mastership of his own mind is a Buddha, and that those who have not 
done so are unenlightened sentient beings. 

--- PAGE 704 ---
APPENDIX 
4. That sentient beings and Buddhas are, in essence, identical. Buddhas are enlightened sentient beings, and sentient beings unenlightened Buddhas. 
5. That this infinite, all-embracing Buddha-Mind is beyond comprehension and attributes. The best and closest definition might be: 
"Buddha-Mind is a GREAT ILLUMINATING-VOID 
AWARENESS." 
6. That the consciousness of sentient beings is of limited awareness; 
the consciousness of an advanced yogi, of illuminating awareness; the 
consciousness of an enlightened Bodhisattva, of illuminating-void 
awareness; and the "consciousness" of Buddha, the GREAT ILLU-
. MINATJNG-VOID AWARENESS. 
7. That all Buddhist teachings are merely "exaltations," preparations, 
and directions leading one toward the unfoldment of this GREAT 
ILLUMINATING-VOID AWARENESS. 
8. That infinite compassion, merit, and marvels will spontaneously 
come forth when this Buddha-Mind is fully unfolded. 
9. That to unfold this Buddha-Mind, two major approaches or Paths 
are provided for differently disposed individuals: the Path of Means, 
and the Path of Liberation. The former stresses an approach to Buddhahood through the practice of taming the Pral}a, and the latter an 
approach through the practice of taming the mind. Both approaches, 
however, are based on the truism of the IDENTICALITY OF MIND 
AND PRA~A.3 (T.T.: Rlufi.Sems.dWyer.Med.), which is the fun- . 
· damental theorem of Tantrism. 
The principle of the Identicality of Mind and Pral}a may be briefly 
stated thus: The world encompasses and is made up of various contrasting forces in an "antithetical" form of relationship- positive and 
negative, noumenon and phenomenon, potentiality and manifestation, 
vitality and voidness, Mind and Priit)a, and the like. Each of these 
dualities, though apparently antithetical, is an inseparable unity. The 
dual forces that we see about us are, in fact, one "entity" manifesting in two different forms or stages. Hence, if one's consciousness or 
mind is disciplined, tamed, transformed, extended, sharpened, illuminated, and sublimated, so will be his Pral)as, and vice versa. The practice that stresses taming the Pral).a is called the "Yoga with Form," 
or the "Path of Means." The practice that stresses taming the mind 
is called the "Yoga without Form," or the "Path of Liberation." The 
former is an exertive type of Yoga practice, and the latter a natural 
and effortless one, known as Mahamudra.4 

--- PAGE 705 ---
APPENDIX 
(I) The Path of Means: The main practices of the Path of Means 
ontain the following eight steps: 
(A) The cultivation of altruistic thoughts, and basic training in the 
discipline of the Bodhisattva. 
(B) The four fundamental preparatory practices, which contain: 
(a) One hundred thousand obeisances to the Buddhas. This 
practice is for the purpose of cleansing all bodily sins and hindrances, thus enabling one to meditate without being handicapped 
by physical impediments. 
(b) One hundred thousand recitations of repentance prayers. \Vhen properly performed, this cleanses mental obstructions 
and sins, clearing out all mental hindrances that may block spiritual growth. 
(c) One hundred thousand repetitions of the prayer to one's 
Guru of the Guru Yoga Practice. This brings protection and blessings from one's Guru. 
(d) Making one hundred thousand Special Offerings. This 
will create favorable conditions for one's devotions. 
(C) The Patron Buddha Yoga, a training for identifying and 
unifying oneself with a divine Buddha as assigned to one by his 
Guru. This Yoga consists of mantra recitations, visualization, concentration, and breathing exercises. 
(D) The advanced form of breathing exercises and their concomitant and subsidiary practices, including the Yogas of Dream, of 
Transformation, of Union, and of Light -
generally known as the 
Perfecting Yogas. 
(E) Guiding the subtle Pral)a-Mind (T.T.: Rluft.Sems.) into 
the Central Channel, thus successively opening the four main Cakras. ("psychic" centers) and transforming the mundane consciousness into transcendal Wisdom. 
(F) Applying the power of Prai}a-Mind to bring about or to 
vanquish at will, one's death, Bardo, and reborn state, thus achieving emancipation from Sarpsara. 
(G) Applying the power of Pral)a-Mind to master the mind-pro~ 
jection performances. 

--- PAGE 706 ---
APPENDIX 
(H) Sublimating and perfecting the Pral)a-Mind into the Three 
Bodies of Buddhahood. 
(2) The Path of Liberation, or the Yoga . without Form, is the 
simplest and most direct approach toward the Buddha-Mind. It is a 
natural and spontaneous practice, bypassing many preparations, strenuous exercises, and even successive stages as laid down in other types of 
Yoga. Its essence consists in the Guru's capability of bringing to hi~ 
disciple a glimpse of the Innate Buddha-Mind in its primordial and 
natural state. With this initial and direct "glimpsing experience," the 
disciple gradually learns to sustain, expand, and deepen his realization 
of this Innate Mind. Eventually he will consummate this realization 
to its full blossoming in Perfect Enlightenment. This practice is called 
Mahamudra. 
(A) The first glimps of the Innate Mind can be acquired either 
through practicing Mahamudra Yoga by oneself, or through receiving a "Pointing-out" demonstration from one's Guru. The former 
way is to follow the Guru's instructions and meditate alone; the 
latter consists of an effort by the Guru to open the disciple's mind 
instantaneously. Both approaches, however, require the continuous 
practice of Mahamudra Yoga to deepen and perfect one's experience. 
(B) The central teaching of Mahamudra consists of two, major 
points: relaxation, and effortlessness. All pains and desires are of a 
tense nature. But Liberation, in contrast, is another name for "perfect relaxation." Dominated by long-established habits, however, 
average men find it most difficult, if not entirely impossible, to reach 
a state of deep relaxation; so instructions and practices are needed 
to enable them to attain such a state. The primary concern of 
Mahamudra, therefore, is to instruct the yogi on how to relax the 
mind and thus induce in him the unfolding of his Primordial Mind. 
Paradoxically, effortlessness is even more difficult to achieve than 
relaxation. It requires long practice to become "effortless" at all 
times and under all circumstances. If one can keep his mind always 
relaxed, spontaneous, and free of clinging, the Innate Buddha-Mind 
will soon dawn upon him. 
(3) The Path of Means and The Path of Liberation, exist only in 
the beginning stages. In the advanced stages these two Paths converge 
and become one. It is to the advantage of a yogi, in order to hasten 

--- PAGE 707 ---
APPENDIX 
his spiritual progress, if he can either practice both teachings at the 
same time or use one to supplement the other. Most of the great yogis 
of Tibet practiced both Paths, as did Milarepa. 
THE TRANSLATION OF THE BOOK 
To the best knowledge of the translator, the Mila Grubum, or the 
"Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa," has never before been com· 
pletely translated from Tibetan into any major foreign language. Translations of several sections, however, have been available for some 
time. Many thoughtful and interested readers may be curious as to 
why an important work such as this has never been fully translated. 
There are many reasons for this. In addition to the depth of the wprk 
itself, a num her of technical difficulties are involved. Scholars of 
Tibetan Buddhism do not find it very difficult to translate the conventional type of Buddhist Sutras and Sastras, for they are all written 
with established terminologies, phraseologies, and styles. The enigmatic passages of a Tibetan text frequently can be deciphered by means 
of a comparative study of the equivalent text in the Chinese or Sanskrit language. But nothing of this kind is available in the case of the 
Mila Grubum; its language, style, and subject matter are in many 
ways different from those of conventional Buddhist texts. It was written not only in colloquial Tibetan, but in a form of ancient colloquialism strongly tinged wjth a flavor of the local dialect of Southwestern Tibet. The particular phrases with which Milarepa expressed 
his Tantric ideas and mystical experiences, present another formidable 
problem of translation. Moreover, the major part of the book is largely 
composed of verses and songs of an "uncommon" type, which further 
increases the difficulties. 
Being fully aware of these difficulties, I have undertaken this formidable task not without apprehension and concern. I have always been 
of the opinion that a better translation of the Buddhist classics can 
be achieved only by pooling together the talents of many Buddhist 
scholars (in different fields) to make ~ joint effort in the task, as 
did King James of England with the translation of the Bible, and 
Emperors Tai Tsung and Khri.SroidDe.bTsan. of China and Tibet 
with the translations of Buddhist Siitras in the Tang period. Individual 
efforts .in this type of undertaking are always difficult. It is my hope, 
therefore, not to make a perfect translation, but rather to see that 
this important work of Tibetan Buddhism is soon made available 
to the world. As a Chinese proverb has said, "The purpose of my throw-

--- PAGE 708 ---
APPENDIX 
ing a brick is to induce people to cast their jade." My greatest desire 
is to see that this pioneer translation, imperfect as it may be, rouses 
a wider interest in the work itself, and thus serves as a prelude to more 
and better translations of the Mila Grubum to follow. 
Because no clear statement appears in the book, the author or compile,r of the Mila Grubum is not clearly known. Except in Stories 29, 
30, and 31, where the compilers' names -
Shiwa.Hod. and Ran. 
rDson.sTon.Pa.- are given, the name of the compiler of the vast 
majority of the stories- a total of 58- is not clearly mentioned. It 
is interesting to note, however, that these stories seem to have a uniform style, and, when. compared with Stories 29, 30, and 31, they reveal an outstanding difference, flavor, and superior quality. Beyond 
any doubt they were written by another author. I therefore assume 
that this compiler or author is the same person as the author of the 
Mila Khabum, or Namthar (Mi.La.bKah.hBum., or .rNam.Thar. -
the "Biography of Milarepa"), namely, the fabulous and mysterious 
yogi, gTsan.sMyon.Heruka.- "The Mad Yogi from gTsan"5 -
who 
was a disciple of Phag.Mo.Gru.Pa. (lll0-1170), the celebrated pupil 
of Gambopa (1079-1161), Milarepa's chief disciple. Another strong 
piece of evidence seems also to support this opinion: in the Mila 
Khabum, or Namthar, from Folio 109 to Folio 113, there is a detailed 
account of Milarepa's life story which is identical with that of the 
Grubum; even the sequence of the stories in the two books is in 
perfect correspondence. There seems to be no other explanation than 
the fact that both books were compiled by the same person, either in 
the latter part of the 12th or in the beginning of the 13th century. 
Professor Herbert V. Guenther, of the Sanskrit University, Varanasi, 
India, was so kind as to do some research for me on this problem. 
His findings are stated in a letter to me, .as follows: " ... just to let 
you know that your surmise that the biography of Mi.La.Ras.Pa. [the 
Mila Khabum] is not by Ras.Chun.Pa. [Rechungpa] but by the "Insane Yogi" is correct. While I was studying my sRan.r.Gyud., I came 
across the following line: 'Dur.Khrod.Myul.Bahi.rNal.hByor.Pa.Sans. 
rGyas.rGyal.mTshan.gTsan.Pa.He.Ru.Ka.Rus.Pahi.rGyan.Can.Sogs. Du. 
Mahi.Min.Can.Gis.bKod.Pa.' The same names occur at the end of 
Mi.La.Ras:Pa's rNam.Thar. It seems that the confusion with Ras.Chun. 
Pa. is due to the fact that gTsan.Pa.Heruka is considered as an incarnation of Ras.Chun.Pa. and as one of the disciples of Phag.Mo.Gru. 
Pa .... By this strong evidence the authorship of both the Mila Khabum and the Mila Grubum is thus established to be by Sans.rGyas. 
rGyal.mTshan, the 'Insane Yogi from gTsan,' who bears many different names." 

--- PAGE 709 ---
APPENDIX 
The sequence of stories appearing in the Mila Grubum seems to 
have been arranged, not in the strict chronological order of Milarepa's 
life, but rather into three groups according to the contents of the stories. Stories of Milarepa's encounters with malignant spirits are found 
in the first part of the book; stories of Milarepa and his human disciples, in the middle part; and stories of a more varied and general nature, at the end. This classification, of course, should not be treated 
too rigidily, for most of the stories contain, in some measure, all three 
elements. 
The Tibetan text of the Mila Grubum has four major versionsthose of Peking, of Narthang, of Dege, and of Lhasa. The Lhasa 
edition, containing 319 wood-printed folios and 61 stories, has been· 
used in this translation. I believe this edition to be the latest publication among the four, being more or less a reproduction of the Dege 
version. 
Because of the complexity and particularity of Tibetan Buddhist 
terminology, explanatory notes for these terms are necessary. Nevertheless, I have tried to make these notes as simple as possible to avoid 
over-elaboration, lest they become a burden rather than a help to the 
gener\1 reader and thus impede the reading of the text itself. 
The Tibetan names, both of places and persons, are all rendered 
phonetically6 in order to avoid the cumbersome, confusing, and impractical transliteration of Tibetan words, e.g., instead of s~an.gYon., 
"Nyan Yuan"; Mi.La.Ras.Pa., "Milarepa"; gTsug.Tor.rNam.rGyal., 
"Tsudor Namjal"; Zla.Wa.bZan.Po., "Dawazungpo," etc. This simplification is not only desirable and necessary from a practical viewpoint, 
but is also founded on the very fact that the Tibetans themselves have 
for several centuries abandoned pronouncing these cumbersome prefixes and suffixes in their everyday speech as well as in their reading. 
Nevertheless, to help scholars of Tibetanology in identifying these 
names, a list of important Tibetan names and terms is attached at the 
end of this book, wherein both the pronunciation and transliteration 
are given. The Romanization of Tibetan words in the book is based 
on the Sarat Chandra Das system.7 
For. the same reason Tibetan diacritical marks are omitted in the 
text, but included in the notes. 
In the year 1950, when I was in retreat at Kalimpong, India, Lady 
Yutog, a devout Tibetan noblewoman, came to visit me. She was interested to hear that I, a young Chinese, who had spent a number of 
years studying Tibetan Buddhism in Eastern Tibet, was now practicing meditation at Kalimpong. After an exchange of information and 

--- PAGE 710 ---
APPENDIX 
ideas, she appeared to be delighted. The second morning she came to 
see me again, bringing with her a huge Tibetan book wrapped in an 
elegant yellow silk scarf, and said to me, "This is the Mila Grubum. 
I now offer it to you, for I understand how much this book would 
mean to a person in retreat. My greatest hope is, however, to see the 
message of Milarepa reach every corner of the globe. I hope you will 
translate this book into English some day, so that many people can 
read it and profit from it." Jubilantly I accepted this wonderful gift, 
for this was just the book I had been painstakingly seeking ever since 
I had lost all my Tibetan books during my escape into India from 
China. 
In retrospect, now that the translation is completed, I feel more 
grateful than ever to Lady Yutog for this inspiring and deeply significant visit. Under divine wisdom and guidance she brought to me a 
precious gift, together with insight into an important mission and 
challenge- one which I accepted with joy and inspiration during a 
critical period in my life. 
NOTES 
I Mila Grubum represents the Tibetan pronunciation of the title. The transliteration would be: Mi.La.Ras.Pahi.mGur.hBum. 
2 According to "The Blue Annals," p. 427, Milarepa was hom A.D. 1040 
and died A.D. 1123. But according to the Mila Khabum, or Namthar, the dates 
should be 1052 and 1135. 
3 Pra~a: a Sanskrit term, equivalent to the Tibetan term Rluft. and to the 
Chinese term Ch'i, conveying various meanings: air, energy, vital force, breathing, propensity, and so forth. An exact translation of this term into English is ex· 
tremely difficult. 
4 A renowned version of the Mahlimudra system is set forth in English 
translation, along with Chang's "Yogic Commentary" thereon, in "Tibetan Yoga 
and Secret Doctrines," 2nd ed., edited by Dr. W. Y. Evans·Wentz (Oxford University Press, 19 58). 
5 Although the text of the Mila Khabum opens with Rechungpa's request to 
Milarepa to relate his life story in the very beginning of the book as well as in each 
of its successive chapters, this by no means suggests that Rechungpa was the author 
of the Mila Khabum, as some scholars are inclined to believe. On the contrary, 
this fact provides strong evidence that Rechungpa was an actor in the "drama of. 
the Mila Khabum" as portrayed by the author, rather than the author himself. 
The fact that gTsaii.sMyon.Heruka was the author of the Mila Khabum is well 
known in Tibet. 

--- PAGE 711 ---
APPENDIX 
6 In the case of personal names ending in cr, Pa instead of Ba is used, e.g., 
Milarepa, not Milareba, and Rechungpa, not Rechungba, though phonetically "Pa" 
should be pronounced "Ba" in modem Tibetan. This compromise seems to be 
necessary since these names are now more or less established in the West. 
7 In order to keep the transliteration as close to the ''Tibetan way" as possible, the letter :;I" (Ba) is also transliterated as "Wa" after the prefix ~· (Da), 
e.g., dWaii-bShj., not dBaii.bShi. This is because all Tibetans invariably pronounce 
it as "Wa." This, of course, should not be mistakenly identified with the other 
Wa ( 'ti" ), the 20th consonant. This rule is also true in the case where the letter 
is used to form a noun, e.g., dGe.Wa., not dGe.Ba. The root of each Tibetan 
word is always capitalized to facilitate identification. In the case of Z'cf", ~· , 
~· , E(• , and @\• - Pha, Tsa, Tsha, Dsa, and Sha- only the first letter of 
th.,root is capitalized. Also note: ''T.T." stands for Tibetan Transliteration. 

--- PAGE 712 ---
GLOSSARY 
Alaya Consciousness -
the "Store" Consciousness. The function of this consciousneu 
is to preserve the "seeds" of mental impressions. Memory and learning are made 
possible because of this consciousness. In a loose sense, it can also be regarded as 
the "Primordial Consciousness" or "Universal Consciousness." 
Bardo -
the intermediate stage between death and rebirth. 
Bodhi- Buddhahood, or that which concerns Buddhahood. 
Bodhi-Mind (Skt.: Bodhicitta)- the aspiration to Buddhahood; the determination 
to practice all the virtuous deeds that lead toward Buddhahood; the enlightened 
insight into immanent Reality; the great compassionate Vow to serve, benefit, and 
deliver all sentient beings. 
Bodhisattva- a man who has taken a vow to strive for Enlightenment and save all 
sentient beings; a man who aspires to Buddhahood and altruistic deeds; an enlightened being; a follower of Mahiyana Buddhism. 
Bon Religion -
the aboriginal religion of Tibet. 
J;>akinis -
goddesses, or female deities. 
Deva -
a general term for gods, angels, or heavenly beings. 
Dh;~rma- a term having two main usages: (I) to signify object, matter, or thing; 
(2) to mean the teaching and doctrine of Buddhism, hence, the religious truth 
and Law. 
Dharmadhatu- Totality, or the realm of Ultimate Reality. 
Dharmakaya -
the "Body of Truth," or the real "Body" of Buddha, which is formless, omnipresent, ultimate, and yet void. 
Dhyana- an equivalent of Samadhi which, according to the Buddhist version, denotes a group of pure concentrative states. 
Dumo's Fire- The "mystic" heat that is produced in the Navel Center through 
the practice of Heat Yoga. 
· 
Eight Worldly Winds, or Eight Worldly Dharmas- a metaphoric term denoting 
the "winds," or inftuences, which fan the desires and passions, i.e.: gain, loss; defamation, eulogy; praise, ridicule; sorrow, joy. 
Experience and Realization (T.T.: Nams.Dafi.rTog.Pa.) -
The former term denotes 
the Yogi's experiences, understandings, and insights prior to Enlightenment; the 
latter denotes the real Enlightenment. The resemblance of the two often confuses 
a yogi into mistaking the former for the latter. 
Foundation, Path, and Fruit- Foundation is the immanent Buddha-nature; Path 
is the action or practice that leads toward the unfoldment of the Buddha-nature; Fruit is its realization. 
Jetsun- The Revered One (a title). 
Kle~as -
the worldly desires and impulses that cause one to wander in Saf!lslira. 
--- PAGE 713 ---
APPENDIX 
Among them, three are most prominent: lust, hatred, and ignorance. 
Mahamudra- the most important teaching of Tibetan Tantrism, by which one is 
led to the realization of the Dharmakaya; the practical verbal instruction on how 
to meditate on the Void. 
Ma~Qala- meaning "circle" or "center." A ma~Qala is an extremely complex pic· 
torial design that symbolizes the phenomenal world of Tantric Buddhas. 
Nhamdog -
the disturbing and wavering thoughts which one encounters in medi· 
tation; wrong or uncontrollable thollihts; misconception ar misjudgment. 
Nirma~akaya -
the transformation or incarnation Body of a Buddha. 
Paramitas -
the spiritual deeds of a Bodhisattva that bring him to Buddhahood. 
Prajiia- Transcendental Wisdom, or the supramundane insight into Reality. 
Pra~a- Pra~a conveys various meaning's such as air, breath, energy, wind, vitality, 
and so forth. Yogically speaking, Pra~a is the vital force in the physical body to 
be tamed and mastered in order to achieve the total transformation of mind and 
energy. 
Pra~a-Mind (T.T.: Rluii.Sems.) -
According to Tibetan Tantrism, mind and Pra~a 
are but two facets of one entity. They should never be treated as two separate 
things. If one's mind is disciplined, transformed, extended, sharpened, illuminated 
... so also is one's Pra~a- the vital force that gives birth to all manifestations. 
Samadhi- a pure concentrative state. 
SaqlSara- the wheel of life and death; the migration through many rebirths; the 
doctrine of reincarnation. 
Siinyata- voidness or emptiness; that which denies the viewpoints based on existence or non·existence, being or non-being; the doctrine that holds that all becom· 
ings in the phenomenal world are devoid of self-nature, entity, or substance, that 
they are illusorily existent but not truly so; the all-inclusive Totality seen by an 
enlightened mind. 
The Tantra- the holy scriptures of Tantrism. 
Tantrism- the doctrine and teaching of Tantrayana, or Vijrayana; one School of 
Mahayana Buddhism; "esoteric" Mahayana Buddhism. 
Three Main Channels, or NaQis -
the three "mystical nerve channels" through 
which all supramundane knowledge and power are gained; through the Central 
Channel the Dharmakaya is realized, and through the right and left Channels, 
the Sambhogakaya and Nirma~akaya are realized. 
Three Precious Ones, or the Three Gems (Skt.: Triratna)- the Buddha- the En· 
lightened One; tke Dharma- His teachings; and the Sangha- the advanced or 
enlightened Sages. 
Two Truths- the expedient truth and the final truth. 
Whispered Transmission__: the Ghagyuba School of Tibetan Buddhism, founded by 
Marpa and Milarepa. 

--- PAGE 714 ---
TABLE OF TIBETAN WORDS 
PHONETIC RENDERING OF 
TIBETAN WoRDS 
APPEARING IN THE TEXT 
Ahom Chun 
Ah Shea 
Auijee Thajan 
Balkhu 
Balmo Baltang• 
Balsud 
Baltang 
Bardarbom 
Bar Dha Na 
Barkon Gi Tson 
Bedha 
Beghar 
Bepu Mamo Tson 
Betze Duyundzon 
Bhalbo Dson 
Bhamen 
BhaMo 
Bhari 
Bha Ro 
Bije 
Biling Zurkha 
Binayaga [vinayaga] 
Bodor 
Bodorwa Rinchinsal 
Bonbo 
Bong 
Bouto 
Bushen Chitana 
Chamju [JUhu] 
Chira.Repa 
Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje 
Chon Lun 
Chu Bar 
Chueji Jangtse 
Chu Mdo 
Chupoa 
THEIR CouNTERPARTS 
IN 
TRANSLITERATION 
tlom.Chuft. 
A.<;ad. 
tlod.Kyi.mThah.Can. 
dPai.Khud. 
dPal.Mo.dPal.Thaft. 
dPal.bSod. 
dPai.Thaft. 
dPai.Dar .hBum. 
Bar.dHa.Na. 
dPal.Khuft.Kyi.rDsoft. 
Pe.Ta. 
Pe.dKar. 
sBas.Phug.Ma.Mo.rDsoft. 
Be.rTse.hDod.Yon.rDsoii. 
Pal.Bo.rDsoft. 
Ba.Men. 
dPah.Mo. 
Ba.Ri. 
Bha.Ro. 
hBigs.Byed. 
Pi.Lift.Zur.Kha. 
Bi.Na.Ya.Ga. 
Po.Tor. 
Po.Tor.Wa.Rin.Chin.gSal. 
Bon.Po. 
Boft. 
sPo.mTho. 
sPu.Hreft.sKyid.Thaii. 
Khyab.hJug. 
Khyi.Ra.Ras.Pa. 
Khyi.Ra.Wa.mGon.Po.rDo.rJe. 
mChoii.Luii. 
Chu.Bar. 
Chos.Kyi.rGyal.mTshan. 
Chu.mDo. 
Chos.hPhags. 

--- PAGE 715 ---
Dagbo 
Dagbo Lhaje 
Dagmema 
Dagmo Ridra 
Damala Richroma 
Darsen Gharmo 
Daugom Repa Dorje Wonshu 
Dawazungpo 
Dcgar Drozonma 
Dembu [Lady) 
Dem Chog 
Den Yi 
Deut Jal 
Dewashun 
Dhamba Jhaupu 
Dhamo 
Dhampa Sangje [of] Dinrin 
Dhar Lho 
Dharma Aui 
Dharma Bodhi [of India) 
D'ltlrma Wonshu 
Dhawa Norbu 
Din rna 
Dinma Orin 
Din Ri 
Din Ri Namar 
DiSe 
Dodejan 
Dodra 
DogarNya 
Doh 
Dor Draug Rechung 
Dorje-Chang 
Dorje Danyi 
Dorje Paumo 
Dorje Semba 
Dorje Tson 
Dormo 
Dochin 
Drajadorje 
Orang Sung 
Drashi Oma Chuwu 
Drashi Tse 
Drashi Tserinma 
Draugmar Bouto 
Draug Srin Mo 
Ore 
Ore Dun 
Ore Dun Drashi Bar 
Dreloon Joomoo 
Ore Tze 
APPENDIX 
Dags.Po. 
Dags.Po.!Ha.rJe. 
bDag.Med.Ma. 
sTag.Mo.Ri.bKra. 
Ta.Ma.La.Ri.Khrod.Ma. 
Dar.Seft.dKar.Mo. 
sTag.sGom.Ras.Pa.rDor.rJe.dWan. 
Phyug. 
Zla.Wa.bZafi.Po. 
gTad.dKar.hGro.bZan.Ma. 
lHa.!Cam.lDem.Bu. 
bDe.mChog. 
gDan.bShi. 
sTod.rGyal. 
bDe.Wa.sKyon. 
Dam.Ba.rGyags.Phu. 
sTa.Mo. 
Dam.Pa.Sans.rGyas., Tin.Rin. 
Dar.Blo. 
Dar.Ma.:tJ:od. 
Dharma.Bodhi., rGya.Gar. 
Dar.Ma.dWan.Phyug. 
Zla.Wa.Nor.Bu. 
· 
Difi.Ma. 
Din.Ma.Brin. 
Difi.Ri. 
Difi.Ri.sNa.dMar. 
Ti.Se. 
mDo.sDc.rGyan. 
mDo.bKra. 
!To.dKar.Na. 
rOo. 
rDo.Grags.Ras.Chun. 
rDo.rJe.hChaft. 
rDo.rJe.gDan.bShi. 
rDo.rJe.Phag.Mo. 
rDo.rJe.Sems.Pa. 
rDo.rJe.rDson. 
rDor.Mo. 
hDo.Chen. 
Brag.sKya.rDo.rJe 
Dran.Sron. 
bKra.<;is.:tio.Mahi.Chu.Wo. 
bKra.<;is.brTsegs. 
bKra.<;is.Tshe.Rifi.Ma. 
Brag.dMar.sPo.mTho. 
Brag.Srin.Mo. 
hBre. 
hBre.sTon. 
hBre.sTon;bKra.<;is.hBar. 
hDre.Lun.sKyog.Mo. 
hBre.rTse. 
--- PAGE 716 ---
APPENDIX 
Drigom Linkawa 
Drigom Repa 
Orin 
Dritsam 
Drogmanzulema 
Drol Ma [Tara] 
Dronso Charwa 
Oro Tang ... 
Drowazunmo 
Oro Wo [Valley] 
Duinjo's [Wondrous Cow] 
Dumo 
Dumo Ngosangma 
Dunba Dharmadraug 
Dungom Repa 
Gadaya [Cave] 
Galugha 
Gambo Dar 
Gambopa 
Garakhache [Guest House] 
Gawojobo 
Gebha Lesum 
Gelugpa 
Ghadampa 
Ghadaya 
Ghagyu 
Ghagyuba 
Gog Tang 
Goh [Valley] 
Gung Tang 
Gungtuzunpo 
Guru Tsems Chin (of] La Dud 
Gu Tang 
Halo [flower] 
Heruka Galbo 
Jal 
Jarbo Ton Drem [or] Jarbo Tang Drem 
Jaung Chub Tsong 
Jeba Dorje 
Jen [Valley] 
Jenlun Ngan Tson 
Jetsun 
Jhachil Lama 
Jhajogri [Monastery] 
Jhal Khrum 
Jhambar Rolbi Lhadroe 
Jham Mei 
Jhunma [and] Roma 
Ji Dron (Mang Yul Ji Dron) 
hBri.sGom.Glifi.Kha.Wa. 
hBri.sGom.Ras.Pa. 
Brin. 
hBrig.mTshams. 
hBrog.sMan.Zul.Le.Ma. 
sGrol.Ma. 
Grafi.So.Khra.Wa. 
Gro.Thafi. 
hGro.Wa.bZafi.Mo. 
Gro.Wo. 
hDod.hJohi.Ba.Mo. 
gTum.Mo. 
gTum.Mo.si'<o.Safts.Ma. 
sTon.Pa.Dar.Ma.Grags. 
sTon.sGom.Ras.Pa. 
Ka.Daya. 
dGah.Klu.dGah. 
sGam.Po.gDar. 
sGam.Po.Pa. 
Ga.Ra.Kha.Che. 
dGah.Wo.hJog.Po. 
Gad.Pa.Gle.gSum. 
dGe.Lugs.Pa. 
bKah.sDom.Pa. [or] bKah.gDams.Pa. 
Ka.Ta.Ya. 
bKah.rGyud. 
bKah.rGyud.Pa. 
IKog.Thaft. 
Go.Luft. 
Guft.Than. 
Kuft.Du.bZaft.Po. 
Guru.Tsems.Chen., La.sTod. 
Ku.Thafi. 
Ha.Lo. 
He.Ru.Ka.Gal.Po. 
rGyal. 
Gyal.Po.Thaft.hGrem. 
Byaft.Chub.rDsoft. 
dGyes.Pa.rDo.rJe. 
gCen.Lun. 
gCen.Lun.I'<an.rDson. 
rJe.bTsun. 
rGya.mChil. 
rGya.lCags.Ri. 
· rGyal.Khrom. 
hJam.dPal.Rol.Pahi.bLo.Gros. 
ICam.Me. 
rKyaii.Ma., Ro.Ma. 
sKyid.Grofi. 

--- PAGE 717 ---
Jidun 
Jipu· Nimadson 
Jolmo [Singing bird] 
Jomo 
Jomo Chod· Dan 
Joro Dritsam 
Jo Shag 
Joupuva 
Jowo Shakja 
Jun Chub Tsong 
Jundhagho 
Jung 
Jung Bo 
Jungron 
Junpan Nanka Tsang 
Jupan Drinzonma 
Jurmo [fish] 
Kar Chon Repa 
Khum Bu 
KoKom 
Kollo Dompa 
Ku Ju 
Labar Shawa 
Ladgu Lungu 
Lan [tribe] 
Lan Com Repa 
Langgo Ludu Tson 
Lapu 
Lapu Paima Tson 
Lashi [Snow Mountain] 
La Shin 
Lese 
Lese bum 
Lha Oro [of] Orin 
Lhaje Nu Chon 
Lhaman Jalmo 
Lhasa Chrunon 
Lhaze [Temple] 
Lho Draug Wa 
Ligor Sharu 
Linba 
Linba Draug 
Lodahan [River- see Lohida] 
Lodan Sherab 
Lodun 
Londun Gedun 
Lodun Gedunbum 
Lohida [River- see Lodahan] 
Loro 
Lowo [Lake] 
APPENDIX 
Kyi.sTon. 
sKyid.Phug.Ni.Ma.rDsoii. 
hJol.Mo. 
Jo.Mo. 
Jo.Mo.mChod.rTen. 
lCo.Ro.hBrig.mTshams. 
Jo.<;ag. 
rGyags.Phu.Wa. 
Jo.Wo.Shagja. 
Byaii.Chub.rDsoii. 
Byaft.rTa.sGo. 
gCuft. 
hByuii.Po. 
Coii.Roii. 
rKyaft.Phan.Nam.mKhah.rDsoii. 
Cod.Pan.mGrin.bZaii.Ma. 
Gyur.Mo.Na. 
mKhar.Chuii.Ras.Pa. 
Kbum.Bu. 
Ko.Kom. 
hKhor.Lo.sTom.Pa. 
Kbu.Byug. 
Lha.hBar.Bya.Wa. 
La.dGu.Luii.dGu. 
Rus.Glan. 
Glan.sGom.Ras.Pa. 
Glaii.sGo.Klu.bDud.rDsoii. 
La.Phug. 
La.Phug.Padma.rDsoii. 
La.Phyi. 
La.Shiii. 
Legs.Se. 
Legs.Se.hBum. 
Brin.lHa.Bro. 
lHa.rJe.gNubs.Chuii. 
lHa.sMan.rGyal.Mo. 
Lha.Sa.hPhrul.sNaii. 
La.Ze. 
lHo.Brag.Wa. 
Li.sKor.Phya.Ru. 
Liii.Ba. 
Liii.Ba.Brag. 
Lo.Ta.Han. 
bLo.lDan.<;es.Rab. 
Lo.sTon. 
Lo.sTon.dGe.hDun. 
Lo.sTon.dGe.hDnu.hBum. 
Lo.Hi.Ta. 
Lo.Ro. 
gLo.Wo.mTsho. 
--- PAGE 718 ---
APPENDIX 
Ma Goun 
Mamo 
Mamo Tson 
Man Chu [Manlun Chubar] 
Mang 
Mang Yul 
Mang Yul Ji Dron 
Manlun Chubar 
Mannmo 
MaPiim 
Marngo 
Marpa 
Medripa [Skt.: Mait!'Pa] 
Megom Repa 
Menlha [Mount] 
Mijurpa [Buddha) 
Mila Shirah Jhantsan 
Miyo Lonzonma 
Mon [Yul) 
Nagehar 
NamLo 
Nam Men [Karma) 
Namtsoshumo 
Naro Bhun Chun 
Naro Chu Dru 
Ngan Tson 
Ngan Tson Dewa Shun 
Ngan Tson Dunba Shun Chub Jhalbo 
Ngan Tson Dunba Bodhiradza 
Ngogang 
Ngogom Repa Dharma Wonshu Shawa 
Ngomi 
Ngunbatso 
Ngundojan 
Nhamdog 
Ningmaba 
Nin Lung 
Nonyul [Mountain J 
Nu Yin 
Nya 
Nya Chen Yor Mo 
Nyal 
Nyan Chung Repa 
Nyang (Upper] 
Nyan Jue 
Nya Non 
Nya Non Tsar Ma 
Nyantsa Karjan 
Nyan Yuan (Cave] 
Ma.mGon. 
Ma.Mo. 
Ma.Mo.rDson. 
sMan.Chu. 
Man. 
Man.Yul. 
Man.Yul.sKyid.Gron. 
sMan.Lun.Chu.Bar. 
sMan.Mo. 
Ma.Pham. 
Mar .ri'log. 
Mar.Pa. 
Me.Dris.Pa. 
Mes.sGom.Ras.Pa. 
sMan.lHa.Ri. 
Mi.hGyur.Pa. 
Mi.La.c;es.Rab.rGyal.mTshan. 
Mi.gYo.Klon.bZan.Ma. 
Mon.Yul. 
sNag.Phrar. 
gNam.Lo. 
rNam.sMin. 
gNam.mTsho.Phyug.Mo. 
Na.Ro.Bon.Chun. 
Naro.Chos.Drug. 
I'lan.rDson. 
I'lan.rDson.bDe.Wa.sKyon. 
Nan.rDson.sTon.Pa.Byan.Chub.rGyal. 
Po. 
I'lan.rDson.sTon.Pa.Bhodhi.Ra.Dsa. 
si'lo.sKan. 
si'lo.sGom.Ras.Pa.Dar.Ma.dWan. 
Phyug.Bya.Wa. 
ri'log.Mis. 
mi'lon.Pa.mDsod. 
mi'lon.rTog.rGyan. 
rNam.rTog. 
rNin.Ma.Pa. 
rNifl.rLufl. 
sNafi.Yul. 
gNod.sByin. 
glSiah. 
JSra.Chen.Yor.Mo. 
glSial. 
glSian.Chufi.Ras.Pa. 
Myan.sTod. 
sNan.brGyud. 
glSiah.Nan. 
glSiah.Nan.rTsar.Mar. 
Myafi.Tsha.dKar.rGyan. 
slSian.gYon. 

--- PAGE 719 ---
APPENDIX 
Nyi Shang 
Nyi Shang Cur Da 
Nyi Shang Ka Daya 
Nyi Tong 
NyiWa 
Nyurumpa 
OgMen 
Oujen (Pure Land of] 
Padru 
Pagmo 
Pakshu 
Pan (region] 
Pat Ma Tod Tchin [Padma Sa~pbhava] 
Paugba Wadi 
Phuyagzha 
[Queen of the Azure Height] 
Radun Dharma Lhodre 
Ragma 
Ri La (Goat Hill] 
Ramdin Nampu 
Rechin [Meditation Cave] 
Rechung Dor Draug Shawa 
Rechung Dorje Draugpa 
Regba Dhujen 
Riga Daya (Cave] 
RigMa 
Rin Chin Drag 
Riwo Balnbar 
Rom a 
Ron Chon Repa 
Rondunlaga 
Runpu 
Sable Aui 
Sajya (Monstery] 
Samye [Temple] 
San Chia Yogi 
Sangdan Dranma 
Sangje Jhap 
Seba (Valley] 
Semodo 
Sendentsema 
Sen Ding 
Sevan Dunchon Shawa 
Sevan Jashi 
Sevan Jashi Bar 
Sevan Repa 
Seyi Lhamo 
Shadulwa Tsinpa 
sNi.<;ans. 
sNi.<;ans.Gur.rTa. 
sRi.<;abs.Ka.Taya. 
Ni.mThofts. 
sNi.Wa. 
sNug.Rum.Pa. 
:tlog.Min. 
Ao.rGyan. 
Pha.Drug. 
Phag.Mo. 
Pak!;u. 
hPhan.Yul. 
Pat.Ma.Thod.Phreft. 
hPhags.Pa.Wa.Ti. 
Phu.Yag.Za. 
mThon.mThift.rGyai.Mo. 
Ra.sTon.Dar.Ma.Bio.Gros. 
Rag.Ma. 
Ra.La. 
Ram.sDifts.gNam.Phug. 
sGrub.Phug.Ras.Chen. 
Ras.Chuft.rDo.Grags.Bya.Ba. 
Ras.Chuft.rDo.rJe.Grags.Pa. 
Reg.Pa.Dug.Can. 
Ri.Ka.Taya.Phug. 
Rig.Ma. 
Rin.Chen.Grags. 
Ri.Wo.dPal.hBar. 
Ro.Ma. 
Roii.Chuft.Ras.Pa. 
Roft.sTon.!Ha.dGah. 
Ron.Phug. 
Sa.Le.:tiod. 
Sa.sKyar. 
bSam.Yas. 
San.Ca.Dso.Ki. 
bSam .gDan.sGron.Ma. 
Sans.rGyas.sKyabs. 
Se.Pa.Luft. 
Se.Mo.Do. 
Seft.!Den.Tsher.Ma. 
Sen.!Den. 
Se.Wan.sTon.Chuft.Bya.Wa. 
Sc.Wan.bKra.<;is. 
Se.Wan.bKra.<;is.hBar. 
Se.Wan.Ras.Pa. 
bSehi.Lha.Mo. 
Bya.hDui.Wa.hDsin.Pa. 
--- PAGE 720 ---
APPENDIX 
Sbajaguna 
Shambo 
Shamboche 
Shangchub Bar 
Shangon Repa 
Shapa Linpa 
Shar Bo 
Shar Mo 
Sha Yul [region] 
Shin Ore 
Shen Com Repa 
Sherpug Chushin Dson 
Shilabharo [of Nepal] 
Shindormo 
Shiwa Aui 
Shri Ri 
Shumo Sernodo 
Shun Chub Jarbo 
Sidpa Bardo 
Singalin 
Sinhala 
Srinmo 
Sudnam Rinchin 
Sungdue 
Sungwa Nyinbo 
Sungwong Dueba 
Tantra [of the Wrathful and Peaceful 
Buddhas] 
Tara [Drol Ma] 
Ta Zig 
Tig Le 
Tingeyalzunma 
Tong Lha 
Tsamlin 
Tsang 
Tsanbudrisha 
Tsan Rigs 
Tsapu Repa 
Tsar Ma 
Tsem Chin Guru [of] La Dud 
Tserinma 
1'sese 
Tsiba Conti Tson 
Tsiwo Repa 
Tsomanma 
Tsonlung [Cave] 
Tsudor Namjhal 
Tubhaga 
Tuntin 
Wadi 
<;akya.Gu.Na. 
<;am.Po. 
Phyam.Po.Che. 
Byaft.Chub.hBar. 
g<;en.bsGom.Ras.Pa. 
<;a.Pa.gLift.Pa. 
Byar.Po. 
Byar.Mo. 
Bya.Yul. 
g<;in.hDre. 
g<;en.bsGom.Ras.Pa. 
<;er.Phug.Chu.<;in.rDsoft. 
<;i.La.Bha.Ro., Bal.Po. 
gGen.rDor.Mo. 
Shi.Wa.:ijod. 
<;ri.Ri. 
Phyug.Mo.Se.Mo.Do. 
Byaft.Chub.rGyal.Po. 
Srid.Pa.Bar.Do. 
Sin.Ga.Glin. 
Sen.Ha.La·. 
Srin.Mo. 
bSod.Narns.Rin.Chen. 
gSaft.hDus. 
gSaft.Wa.sl"'ift.Po. 
gSaft. Wa.hDus.Pa. 
Shi.Khrohi.rGyud. 
sGrol.Ma. 
rTa.Zig. 
Thig.Le. 
mThift.Gi.Shal.bZaft.Ma. 
Thoft.La. 
hDsam.gLift. 
gTsaft. 
hDsam.Bu.Tri.<;a. 
bTsan.Rigs. 
rTsa.Phu.Ras.Pa. 
rTsar.Ma. 
Tshems.Chen.Gu.Ru., La.sTod. 
Tse.Rift.Ma. 
mDses.Se. 
rTsig.Pa.rKoft.mThil.rDsoft 
rDsi.Wo.Ras.Pa. 
mTso.sMan.Ma. 
mTshoft.Luft.Brag. 
gTsug.Tor.rNam.rGyal. 
Thos.Pa.dGah. 
mThon.mThift. 
Wa.Ti. 

--- PAGE 721 ---
Wa Jal 
W ala Tsandra 
Weu 
Weu [and] Tsang 
Wurmo 
Wutso Gabar Jalbo 
Yagder 
Yagru 
Yang Nge 
Yaugru Tangbha 
Yei Ru Jang 
Ye Rang [and] Ko Kom [King of] 
Y e Shin Dsu Pud 
Yidagmo 
Yidham 
Yolmo 
Yaugra Tangbha 
Yundun 
Yunlaza 
Yuru Kradrag 
Zhaoo 
Zung Ghar [Tradition] 
APPENDIX 
Wa.rGyal. 
Wa.La.Tsandra. 
dWus. 
dWus., gTsaii 
tlur.Mo. 
dWu.gTso.dGah.hBar.rGyal.Po. 
gYag.sDer. 
gYag.Ru. 
gYeii.l<>le. 
gYag.Ru.Thaii.Pa. 
gYas.Ru.Byaii. 
Ye.Raii., Kho.Khom. 
Ye.g<;en.gTsug.Phud. 
gShi.bDag.Mo. 
Yi.Dam. 
Yol.Mo. 
gYag.Ru.Thaii.Pa. 
gYuii.sTon. 
Yaii.La.Za. 
gYu.Ru.Khra.hBrug. 
Za.ljog. 
Zaiis.di<ar.Lugs. 
*The word-ending "ang" should be pronounced as "ang" throughout. 
**"Tang" should be pronounced as "Ton," or "Tang." 
--- PAGE 723 ---
INDEX 

--- PAGE 725 ---
Abhiisvara, 673n3 
Abhidharma Ko$3 (Ngunbatso Sastra), 
Abhismayiilailkiira (Ngundojan Sastra), 
Absolute Reality, 55nl2 
Absolute Truth, 324, 325, 33lnl5 
Absolute Universality, see Dharmadhiitu 
Accomplishment (Fruit), 126, 130nn 
5,6,7; see also Wisdom of Accomplishment 
Accomplishment-of-Freedom-from-Obstacles, 187, 189n49 
Accomplishments: concealment of, 
525-26; of Milarepa, 369, 393-95; 
worldly (miraculous. powers), offer 
of, by I;>akinis, to Milarepa, 322-2 3 
Accumulation of merits, 45, 55n22, 
77, 86nll 
Act-of-Insanity, 33ln2 
Action, 69-70, 72n3, 79-80, 212 
Action of Equality, 342, 355n13, 456, 
462n2 
Activity, 250 
Activity, daily, 93, 94n5 
Actual-Meditation-State (Main Samiidhi), 105nll 
Address to worldly I;>akinis, by Milarepa, 319-22 
Adi Buddha, 214nl 
Adiyoga Vehicle, i58n5 
Advice: of female demons, to Milarepa, 304.7; of Milarepa, to Gambopa, 
491-95, to Rechungpa, 400-1, 58689, 643-45 
Affirmation and negation, 56n40 
After-Meditation-State (Ensuing Samiidhi), 105nll 
Ah, 455nl, 617 
Ah Shea Vital Heat, 166; see also Vital Heat Yoga 
Ah Tsa Ma demons, 13, 2ln5, 59 
Ah Tung, 109, 113nl2 
INDEX 
Ahdsidharata, 318 
Ahkaru staff, gift of Dipupa, to Milarepa, 421, 426 
Ahru of Bhamen, 589 
Ahrura (drug), 288-94 passim; gift of, 
to Gambopa, by Milarepa, 492, 
497n28 
Ahtsarya Bodhi Radsa, see Bodhi Radsa 
Alaya Consciousness, 52, 55nll, 56n38, 107, 112nl, 123, 132, 135nl, 
199nl0, 269-70 
Alaya-vijiiiina, see Alaya Consciousness 
Ail-knowing Wisdom, 372-73n2 
All-Merciful Mother Tiirii, 288, 294 
All-sources Consciousness, 56n38 
Alms, 
non-discrimination in begging, 
152, 156n3 
Aloewood staff, gift of Dipupa, to Milarepa, 401 
Anabhraka, 673n3 
Angels: appearance in pigeon form, 
88-93; see also Devas 
Animals, 9nl6; sufferings of, 667-68 
Anuttara Tantra, 22n27, 67nl8, 258n5, 614n4 
Anuttara Tantra Initiations, 5Sln2 
Anuyoga Vehicle, 258n5 
Apparition of dead man, Bonist trick, 
ApramiiJ;~iibha, 673n3 
Apramiit:~a~ubha, 673n3 
Arhats, 262, 274nl 
Arising of Self-Buddha Pride (Identification-with-Buddha), 332nl7 
Arising Yoga, 19, 22n27, 63, 67n18, 
70, 7fJ, 86n7, 187n5, 199nl, 348, 
352, 376-77, 405, 515, 519nl, 551n2 
Asailga, 195 
Ashes, dispersal of, by Gambopa, 491 
Assurances, 142 
Asuras (Non-men), 9nl6, 21-22nl7, 
501, 570; sufferings of, 664 
Atapa, 673n3 

--- PAGE 726 ---
INDEX 
Atisha, 496n8 
Attachments, freedom from, 288-89 
Auijee Thajan, 354 
Auspicious Ladies of Long Life, visit 
to Milarepa, 336-53 
Auspicious Lady of Long Life, 360, 
542-43; see also Tserinma 
~uspicious Milk River, 334 
Autobiograp~, of Milarepa, 267-68, 
H4-75 
Avadhiiti, see Central Channel 
Avalokitmara, 636n2 
AvataQlsaka Siitra, 562n 3 
Avrha, 673n3 
Awareness,248, 302,383 
Away-from-Playwords, 98-99, 104n1 
Ba Men, 313, 331n4 
Balkhu, 401, 421 
Balmo Baltang Plain, 428 
Balsud, 465-66 
Bandits: meeting with Milarepa, 157 · 
58; meetiQg Milarepa's disciples, 291 
Bar Dha Na, 313, 33ln5 
Bardarbom, 136-48 passim 
Bardo, 25, 36n4, 58, 66n2, 103, 105n16, 165, 166, 230, 239n6, 300, 33954 passim, 488-89, 510, 512n2; see 
also Three Bardos 
Bardo Englightenment, 166 
Bardo of Birth and Death, 348 
Bardo of Dream-and-Sleep, 348 
Bardo of Here-and-Now, 25, 36n5 
Bardo-of-the-Path, 348 
Bardo Yoga, 9n9 
Barkon Ci Tson, 2 57 
Bedha (sister of Milarepa), 616-23 
passim 
Bedma Tutrin, 45, 55n23; see also Padrna Sarpbhava 
Beer, as symbol of Enlightenment, 
572-75 
Beer-drinking party, Milarepa's meet· 
ing with, 538-39 
Belly Cave of Nya Non, 131, 366, 
37i, 381, 403, 5"l9, 563, 58"l, 606 
Belt and knife: offer of, to Milarepa, 
171; refusal of, by Milarepa, 171Bepu Mamo Tson, 257 
Betze Duyundzon (the Land of Pleas· 
ure), 421, 435 
Beyond-all-Playwords, 161 
Beyond-Reach Bliss, 189n36 
Bha Mo, 298, 300, 3lln3, 44ln2, 6S5 
Bha Ro, 13-20 txtssim 
Bha Wo, 298, 3lln3, 428, 44ln2, 655 
Bhalbo Dson, 366, 368, 372 
Bharima, 401 
Bhiimi, 519, 519n3; see also First 
Bhiimi; Tenth Bhiimi, etc. 
Bidrama, 346, 356n23 
Bija, 359, 36ln4 
Bija Pai, 610, 6Hn2 
Bije Mountain Range, 263 
Bindu, 82, 87nl9, 135, 161, 375, 376; 
see also Tig Le 
Bird with Five Families, 399 
Birth, suffering of, 553·54 
Bitch, Milarepa's preaching to, 277Black and Red Planets, exorcism of, 
Black Dharma, 7, 10n32 
Black Hill, 263 
Black Performer, 343 
Black Spot Hell, vision of, 478 
Blessing, Milarepa's, of Rechungpa, 
592-93 
Blessing-skull, 5 50 
Bliss-Void, 167, 188nl4 
Blissful Becoming, 112n4 
Blissful Manifestation, 112n4 
Blissful Passing (Blissful Manifestation or Becoming), 107, ·112n4 
Blood (Essence of the Five Poisons), 
392, 396nH 
"Blue Annals," 690n2 
Blue Heights of the Fair Goddess 
(Snow Mountain of the Lady of 
Long Life), 541-42 
Blue Queen Snow 
Mountain, see 
Queen of the Azure Heights Snow 
Mountain 
Bodhgaya (Bodhigaya), 265, 410 
Bodhi, 61, 86n3 
Bodhi Cave of Ragma, 123 
Bodhi-Heart, 42, 54n3, 123, 170; see 
also Bodhi-Mind 
Bodhi-Mind, 22n20, 54n3, 63, 67nl5, 
178, 
302, 3lln7;-(Tantric in· 
terpretation), 10n20;- (Tig 
Le), 
32, 37n22 
Bodhi-Mind-as-a-Practice, 9-10n20 

--- PAGE 727 ---
Bodhi-Mind-as-a-Wish, 9-10n20 
Bodhi of Kl~as, 331n12 
Bodhi Radsa, 310, 354, 361 
Bodhisattva's Act, 562n3 
Bodhisattva's Vow, 67n15 
Bodhisattvayana Vehicle, 258n5 
Bodily changes, felt by Gambopa, 478INDEX 
Bodor Monastery, 466 
Bodorwa Rinchinsal, 466 
Body, human, 125; value of, 100, 104n4, 116; Milarepa's offering of, 3034; offering of to sentient beings, 59, 
66n4; positive and negative elements 
in, 105nl4 
Body-of-Essence, 343, 355nl5 
Body-of-Form, 489, 497n24 
Body of Illusion, 229, 239n5 
Body of the Universal Essence (Bodyof-Essence), 355n15 
Body of Truth, see Dharmakaya 
Bon, 
156n7, 215, 
223n1, 
243-57 
passim, 615-16 
Bon priest, Milarepa's contest with, 
215-23 
Bon ritual, Milarepa's mimic version, 
243-57 
Bonbo, 541 
Bong, 159 
Bonist, conversion of, 242-58 
Book of Cesar, The, 311n8 
Books, Indian: given by Rechungpa 
to Milarepa, 424; burned by Milarepa, 442-43; demanded back by 
Rechungpa, 445-53 passim; miraculously 
restored 
to 
Rechungpa, 
Bouto of Red Rock, 440, 442 
Brahmapari~adya, 673n3 
Brahmapurohiat, 673n3 
Brhatphala, 673n3 
Brothers-of-Vajra, 412, 420n4 
Buddha, 9nl4, 239n2, 273, 325; see 
also names of individual Buddhas; 
Patron Buddha;- ,and Five Demons, 44, 55n21; as human mind, 
100, 104n5 
Buddha Amitabha, 355n12 
Buddha Amoghasiddhi, 355n12 
Buddha Dem Chog, 445, 446 
Buddha Dorje Chang, 49, 56n32, 217 
222, 224n5, 266, 341, 355nl2, 356n29, 379, 443, 444; see also Buddha Dorje Semba 
Buddha Dorje Danyi, 445 
Buddha Dorje Pagmo, 356n22, 592 
Buddha Dorje Semba (Dorje Chang), 
49, 56n32 
Buddha Jeba Dorje, 445, 446 
Buddha Jedor, see Buddha Jeba Dorje 
Buddha Kaya, 210, 214n5 
Buddha Korlo Dompa (Sal!lvara), 221 
Buddha Mahamaya, 445, 446 
Buddha Mijurpa, 328, 332n16 
Buddha-Mind, 684 
Buddha-nature, 130nl!5,6,7 
Buddha of Long Life teaching, 401 
B!lddha of Performance, 183 
Buddha of Universal Origin, 391 
Buddha Ratnasambhava, 355n12 
Buddha Sakyamuni, 354, 445, 446, 
463, 506n5; see also Gautama Buddha, Sakyamuni- , vision of, 490 
Buddha Samantabhadra, 139 
Buddha Sungwong Duba, 445, 446 
Buddha the Thunderbolt-Holder, 139 
Buddha Vairocana, 355nl2 
Buddha Vajradhara (Dorje Chang), 
47, 355n12 
Buddha Vajrasattva, 355nl2 
Buddhahood, 577, 583n1, 683-84; at· 
tainment of by layman, 146; of Milarepa, 507-8; nature of, 149n5; realization of, 130nll 
Buddha's Pure Land, 356n21 
Buddhist, 
twin 
qualities 
of, 
192, 
199n4 
Buddhist Canon, 258nl0 
Buddhist Study Center at Sha, 604 
Bushen Chitang, 207 
Business, spiritual, of Milarepa, 536-37 
Butter, 540nll 
Cakras, 188n8, 445-46; see also Four 
Cakras 
Cakravarti 
(King 
of 
the 
Mighty 
Wheel), 399, 401n2 
Calluses, on Milarepa's body, symbolism of, 495 
"Calling the Buddhas and I;>akinis for 
[My] Army," 297-99 
Carrying pouch, 169, 188n23 
Carya Tantra, 614n4 

--- PAGE 728 ---
Caryatantra Vehicle, 258n5 
Castle of Bodhi, see Jaung Chub Tsong 
Castle Valley, 219 
INDEX 
Cave at Lhaze Temple, 530-32 
Cave of Conquering Demons, 24, 31 
Cave of ManChu, 187 
Cave of Miracle-Working, 220 
Central Channel, 10n28, 32, 359, 418, 
420nl0, 478; see also Avadhuti; 
Dhuti 
Chamju (Rahu), 39, 54nl 
Ch'an (Zen) Buddhism, 8n2, 583n2, 
Channels, three, in the human body, 
see Three Channels; Nac;lis 
Channels, Two, 27, 62, 67nl4 
Chao Chou, HOn2 
Ch'i, 690n3 
Chief Guru, 403, 407n2 
Chief Samadhi, see Main Samadhi 
Chikhai Bardo (Bardo at the moment of death), 355n20 
Child Demons, 300 
Chira Repa (Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje), 278-86, 287 
Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje, see Chira Repa 
ChOnyid Bardo (Bardo of Reality), 
355n20 
Chu Bar, 337, 36lnl, 456, 471, HI, 
637, 662 
Chu La Swordsmanship, 454, 455n3 
Chueji Jangtse, 674 
Circumambulation, 17, 22n23, 54, 61, 
91, 183. 219, 223, 313, 314-15, 323, 
330, 334, 349, 353, 469, 537, 58587 passim, 593 
Clear Light, 128, 130nl2 
Clear Observation, 173, 188n31 
Clinging-to-Dharma, 43, 55nl4 
Clinging-to-Ego, 55nl4, 48, 56n28, 
66n2 
Coat: offer of, to Milarepa, 166, refusal of, by Milarepa, 166-67 
Co-emergent Wisdom, 37nl8 
Collective Unconscious, 112nl 
Companions, spiritual, of Milarepa, 
207-8, 654-57 
Compassion, 132, 135n2; of Guru, 466 
Compassion, Unlimited, 188n25 
Compassion of Buddhahood, 286nl 
Compassion of Non-discernment, 276, 
286nl 
Compassion 
of 
Non-discrimination, 
276, 286nl 
Compassion of the Bodhisattva, 3lln7 
"Complimentary Song to the Deities 
of Red Rock Jewel Valley," 5 
Conch ((Shell] woman), 358, 36ln3 
Confession, Rechungpa's, 640 
Consciousness, 244 
Consciousness of Ripening Karma, 56nConstant-flow-of-thought, 56n29 
Constant-Mindfulness, 249 
Constraint, 591, 604n3 
Contact, 81, 87nl7 
Contemplation, importance of, 129, 
130nl6 
Contemplation-on-Away-from-Subject 
tive-Objective-Ideas, 130n 15 
Contentment, of Milarepa, 517-18 
Cool Garden Cemetery, 318 
Corpse, treatment of, in Tibet, 156nl 
Corrections, 80, 87nl5 
Cotton clothing, of Tantric yogi, 27, 
36n9, 58, 66n1, 83, 87n22 
Creation, Tantric, 22n27 
Crest-jewel, guru liS, 75; see also Guru, 
visualized as sitting above head of 
disciple 
Crow, 85 
Crowned Lady of Good Voice, see 
Jupan Drinzonma 
Crystal stupa, Milarepa's vision of, 416 
Cubits (troos), 199n3 
Cuckoo, 85 
Cutting off of hair, 146, 149n8 
Cutting-through Instruction, 529, HOn6 
Dagbo, 456 
Dagbo Lhaje (the Physician from Dagbo), see Gambopa 
Dagmema, 2, 217 
Dagpo Rinpoche, see Gambopa 
Dakima (Bha Mo), 3lln3 
r;>akini: incarnation in human form 
as the girl Rechungma, 260-74; 
with lion face, Milarepa's vision of, 
I;>akinis (female deities), 4, 9n19, 25, 

--- PAGE 729 ---
INDEX 
26, 233-36; see ctlso Auspicious Ladies of Long Life; Bha Mo; Bha Wo; 
see also names of individual I;>iik· 
1ms; -
:conversion 
by 
Milarepa, 
H3; holy, 331; injunction to Milarepa to go to Lapu, 242; secrecy 
concerning, 353-54; teachings of, ac· 
quired by Rechungpa in India, 423· 
24; worldly, 318, 33ln8, 336, 355n6, 
visit to Milarepa, 313-30 
I;>akini' s ~idge, 12 
Dangers, to be avoided, 184-85 
Dark Noisy Cemetery, 343 
Darsen Charmo (snow lioness), 6, 10· 
n27, 39, 41 
Daughter, 121 
Daugom Repa Dorje Wonshu, 362-65 
Dawazungpo, 471 
Death, 10n26; Milarepa's view of, 6078; preparation for, 567-69; suffering 
of, 556-57 
Death Light (Dharmakaya), 346, 335· 
nl9 
Death-Reviving Drug, 501, 506n4 
Ded, 267, 274n5 
Deeds, meaningful, 101, 104n7 
Deer, 275-86Pt~ssim; Milarepa's preaching to, 275-76 
Degar Drozonma, 313-30 IH!ssim 
Deities, local, injured by smoke of 
fires, 335-46~H~&sim, 3Hn3 
Delusion, 244 
Dem Chog, 161, 183, 221, 262, HI 
Dem Chog Luyipa (SaqlVara), 479, 
497n15 
Dembu, Lady, 637, 638, 647-48 
Demon, female, conquered by Milare· 
pa, 530-32 
Demon Lake, 12 
Demons, 59-61, 246-49, 258nn6,7,8,9; 
attacks on Milarepa, 4·7, 12-20 lUis· 
sim, 297-310, 570-71; conversion of, 
by Milarepa, 572; as guardians of 
the D~rma, 307-8; Indian, see Ah 
Tsa Ma demons 
"Demonstrating the Awareness of Drol 
Ma," 329 
Desires, 10n26 
Destructive thoughts, 4, 9nl8 
Deut Jal, see Jal 
Deva Calugha, 468 
Deva Indra, 468 
Deva-of-Desire, vision of, 478, 497nl3 
Devas, 54n8; attack on Milarepa, 296310; bodies of, 218, 224n7; as guard· 
ians of the Dharma, 307-8 
Devil of the Son of Heaven, 490 
Dewashun, 529, HZ 
Dhagpo, 625 
Dhamba Jhaupu, 200-1 
Dhampa Sangje of Dinrin, 366, 632; 
meeting with Milarepa, 606-13 
Dhar Lho, 498; see ctlso Radun Dhar· 
rna Lhodre 
Dharma, 1, 8n3, 9nl4, 89-93 Pctssim, 
ll0-11, ll5-16, 169, 181-83, 209, 
210-11, 213-H, 246, 271, 280-85 
Pctssim, 290, 375-76, 387-89, 389-90, 
411-16, 
417-20, 
465-66, 
498-99, 
500-1, 527-28, H7-48, 552, 564· 
66, 577-78, 590-91, 602, 617, 621· 
23, 627-29, 632-33, 635-36, 649-52, 
653-H, 658-59; &ee ctlso Black Dhar· 
rna; White Dharma; -
, cane as 
parable of, 191-94; difference be· 
tween Milarepa's and that of schol· 
ar-monks, 380-84; difficulties of prac· 
tieing, 194-97; fitness for, 180-81, 
189n40 
Dharma Aui, 464-65 
Dharma Bodhi of India, meeting with 
Milarepa, 366-72 
Dharma-clinging, see Clinging-to-Dhar· 
rna 
Dharma-Essence, 272, 399, 313, 419, 
420n11 
Dharma Wonshu, see Shiwa Aui, 
Dharma Wonshu Shawa, 210·14 
Dharmadhatu, 19, 2Zn28, 29, 71, 
73n6, 89, 303, 308, 352-53, 377 
Dharmakaya, ZZnzo: 29, 36nl5, 60, 
89, 101, 103n3, 128, 130n12, 139, 
192, 266, 273, 303, 308, 343, 356n· 
26, 504, 508, 512n2, see ctlso Three 
Bodies of Buddha; Trikaya; Ultimate 
Truth 
Dharmakaya (Death Light), H6, 352, 
35Snl9 
Dharmas, lesser, 515 
Dharmata, 51, 56n37 
Dhawa Norbu (the Moon Jewel), 150· 
--- PAGE 730 ---
Dhuti, 418, 420n10; see also Avadhiiti 
INDEX 
Dragon, disease of (leprosy), 113n10 
Dragon Gawajobo, 468 
Dhyana, 67n18, 128-39, 163, 187n7, 
598, 605n8; see also Four Dhyanas; 
Main Dhyana Stage; Ensuing Dhyana Stage 
Dragon King, 337; see also Naga King 
Dragon of Happiness, 19 5 
'orajadorje Mountain, 235 
Dhyana of Infinite Consciousness, 3 55n1if; of Infinite Space, 355nl4 
Dhyana of Neither Consciousness nor 
Non-Consciousness, 355nl4 
Dhyana of Nothingness, 355n14 
Dhyanas, Four, 673n3 
Dhyanic Warmth, 173, 188n30; see 
also Heat Yoga 
Di Se Snow Mountain, 200, 215-23 
passim, 259-62 passim; deities of, 
Diamond Vehicle, 329 
Difficulties, 20 5-6 
Din Ri, 159, 177-79, 471 
Din Ri Namar, 631 
Dinma Orin, 301, 334 
Dinrin, 366; see also Din Ri 
Dipupa, 401, 423, 443 
Direction, idea of, contrary to Wisdom, 31, 37n17 
Disciples: of Milarepa, 625; of Milarepa, prophecy of Vajra I;>akini 
concerning, 103; prophecy of, to 
Milarepa, 159; worthy, rarity of, 
597-98 
Discrimination of the two, 53, 56n40 
Diseases, caused by I;>akinis, 3 34-36, 
354n3 
Distraction, as hindrance to meditation, 43, 55n16 
Distractions, 244 
Disturbing thoughts, 3, 9nl2; see also 
Nhamdog 
Doctrine (Dharma), 8n3 
Dodejan Sastra (Mahayana Siitralaiikara), 466 
Dogar Nya (White-bellied Fish), 39 
Doh of Loro, 645 
Dombhi Heruka, 468 
Dombu Tukar, 417 
Dor Draug Rechung, see Rechungpa 
Dorje Chang, Transmission of, 594 
Dorje Ninpo, 342 
Door-Protector, 217, 224n6 
Donnas, 336, 355n7, 376, 581 
Orang Sung, 501, )06n6 
Drashi Tse, 649 
Drashi Tserinma, see Tserinma 
Draug Srin Mo (feminine demon), 
38-54 
Ore Dun Drashi Bar, 507-12 
Ore Tze Snow Mountain, 210 
Dream: of Marpa and his wife, in 
which goddesses prophesy the coming of Milarepa, 680; Milarepa's, 
of Gambopa's appearance, 467-68; 
Milarepa's, of monk-followers, 496, 
Milarepa's, of his mother and sister, 
680-81; Rechungpa's, of becoming 
bird, 642; Rechungpa's, of dog and 
people, 641-42; Rechungpa's, of nonearthly beings asking for Milarepa's 
biography, 584; Rechungpa's, of riding donkey, 642; Rechungpa's, of 
transformation, 642-43; of Sable Aui, 
revealing Milarepa's identity to her, 
408-9; of the Four Pillars, Milarepa's, 463, 496nl 
Dream Yoga, 9n9, 352, 488 
Dreams, 273; of Gambopa, 480-83, 
interpreted by Milarepa, 48 3-87 
Dreloon Joomoo, 11-12 
Dri Za (Smell Eater), 349, 356n28 
Drigom Linkawa (Drigom Repa), 158, 
403, 576, 597, 602, 625 
Orin, 24, 183, 471, 472, 527, 578, 
Oro Tang, demon king of, appearance 
to Milarepa, 68 
Oro Wo Valley, I, 8n4 
Drogmanzulema of Lashi Snow Mountain, 360 
Dronso Charwa, 471 
Drowazunmo, 207 
Drowsiness: as hindrence to meditation, 43, 55nl6; overcoming, 238, 
240n8 
Drum, Gambopa's, 470-71 
Dsudbhu,444, 455n2 
Dualism, 55nl8, 60, 66n9; 83, 87n21 
Dumo (Vital Heat), 27, 36n10, 29;4, 

--- PAGE 731 ---
INDEX 
363; see also Superb Dumo Instruction 
Dumo's Fire, 179, 189n39; see ctlso 
Heat Yoga 
Dunba (term), 35n1 
Dunba Dharmadraug, see Cambopa 
Eagle Castle of Red Rock Jewel Valley, 1 
Eagle Mountain, 217 
Earth Lord, disease of (leprosy), 113n10 
Eating, refraining from, 62, 67nl3 
Ego, acquired, 56n28 
Ego, Innate or Inborn, 56n28 
Ego-clinging, 1 
Eight Consciousnesses, 244; see also 
Eight Trigrams 
Eight Deeds, 672, 673n7 
Eight Deeds of Buddha, 673n7 
Eight Deprivations, 351 
Eight Desires, 197 
Eight Dharmas, 246 
"Eight Needs," 439-40 
Eight Non-Fears, 217, 224n4 
Eight Non-Freedoms, 
117, 
118n2, 
"Eight Parables of Thinking," 43-44 
"Eight petals," 159 
Eight Planets, 26, 36n7 
"Eight Reminders," 150-51 
Eight Strivings, 340 
"Eight (Supreme] Realms," 229-30 
"Eight Thousand Croups," 326 
"Eight Wondrous Joys," 508-10 
Eight Worldly Affairs, 248 
Eight Worldly Claims, 110, 245; see 
also Eight Worldly Desires; Eight 
Worldly Winds 
Eight Worldly Desires, 224n4, 271, 
563, 564; see also Eight Worldly 
Claims; Eight Worldly Winds 
Eight Worldly Winds, 3, 9nl3, 29, 
111; see ctlso Eight Worldly Claims; 
Eight Worldly Desires 
Eighth Consciousness, see Alaya Consciousness 
Elements, conqueroring of, 313, 331n3 
Elephant (woman), 358, 361n3 
Elephant-Earth-Protector, 195 
Elephantine Work, 400, 402n3 
Empty words, 87nl8 
Energy-Mind, 66n2 
Enlightened mind, 39, 54n3; see also 
Bodhi-Heart; Bodhi-Mind 
Enlightenment, 55nl8, 73n8, 86n9, 
n12, 98-99, 101, 144, 149n7, 250, 
308-10, 372-73n2, 516, 618, 623n2; 
see also Initial Realization of the 
Path 
Enlightenment of Milarepa, 681 
Enlightenment of Rechungpa, 228-33 
Enlightenment of the Path, 105nl7 
Ensuing Dhyana Stage, 163, 187n7 
Ensuing 
Samadhi 
(After-Meditation 
State), 101, 105n11, 404, 407ni 
Equal Action, 197, 199n9 
Equal Acts, 512, 512n3 
Equality, Wisdom of, 2ln8 
Errors, liability to in the practice of 
devotion, 524-25 
Esoteric (Tantric) doctrine, 2)8n) 
Essence (semen), 67n15 
Essence of Mind, 133-34 
Essence of the Five Poisons, 392, 396n14 
Evenmindedness, Unlimited, 188n25 
Ever-Crying Bodhisattva, 480, 497n17 
Evil, 86n3, 244, 245 
Exhaustion-of-the-Elements 
WaterSamadhi 
(Water-Samadhi), 
571, 
575n2 
Exoteric (Siitra) doctrine, 258n5 
Expedient 
Teaching 
(Expedient 
Truth), 227, 239n2 
Expedient Truth (Expedient Teach· 
ing), 18-19, 22n25, 227, 239n2 
Experience, 76-77, 86n9, 250 
Experience, sphere of, 32, 37n20 
Experiences, 142 
Experiences and Realization, 107, 141, 
Eye-obeisance, 315, 33ln6 
Fair Lady of Long Life, 335-53; see 
also Auspicious Ladies of Long Life 
Fair Lady of the Blue Face, ~ee Tingeyalzunma 
Fair Lady of Virtue and Action, see 
Degar Drozonma 
Farewell song to the patrons of Nya 
Non, 602-3 
Farming, allegory of, 190-91 

--- PAGE 732 ---
Faults: recognition of, by Rechungpa, 
582-83; of women, 143 
Fear, 68, 72n2 
Fearlessness, of Milarepa, 30 1-i 
Feast, sacramental, of Milarepa and 
Dhampa Sangje, 613 
Field of Offering, 186, 189ni8 
Fierce Deities, 396n13 
"Fifteen Realizations," 272-73 
Final Teaching (Ultimate Teaching), 
239n2 
First Bliss, 189n 36 
Fishes, 378 
Five Buddhas, vision of, -478 
Five Desires, see Kle~as 
Five Elements, 377; see also Key-words 
of the Five Elements 
Five Gates, 255, 258n17 
Five Hostile Poisons, see Kle~as 
Five Kle~as (Five Poisons, Five Poisonous Cravings), 101, lOinS 
Five Nectars, 178, 190, 199n2, 396nH 
Five Nirma~akayas, 250 
Five Poisonous Cravings (Five Kl~s), 
-48, 56n27 
Five Poisonous Desires, see Five Poisons 
Five Poisonous Passions, see Kl~s 
Five Poisons, 2-45, 537, HOn12, see 
also Five Kl~ 
Five Pra~as, 342, 478 
Five Skandhas, see Skandhas 
Five Small Lakes of Joro Dritsam, 259 
"Fleeting Bubbles," 632-33 
Flesh-eating Demonesses, 297, 300, 
30-4-7 
Flowing River Yoga (Samadhi), 13, 
21ni, 297 
Flowing thoughts, 9n12; see also 
Nhamdog 
Food: gift of, to Milarepa, from I;>akinis, 233; good, offering by patrons, 
to Rechungpa, 58-4; poor, offering 
by patrons, to Milarepa, 58-4 
Food of the Dead, 35, 37n2i, 77, 
86nl0 
Footprints in rock: of goddess, 20; of 
Milarepa, 12, 20n2, 28, 218, 220, 
-416, 629; of Naro Bhun Chon, 218 
Forest Temple of Shar Mo, 6-47 
INDEX 
Forgetfulness, 515 
Form-nature, 56-57n 
Formless Dakini Dharmas, 398, 399401, -423.-28 passim, HZ, -452-53 
Fortune Hill, -472 
Foundation, 126, 130nn5,6,7 
Four Actions, 339, 355n8, 530, HOil7 
"Four Activities," 585 
Four Blisses, 175, 189n36, 359 
Four Bodies of Buddha, 343, 359 
Four Cakras, 166, 188n18 
Four Centers, 377 
Four Continents, 15, 39, -41 
Fo~r Cooperative Acts, 355n8 
Four Demons, 6, 10n26, 116 
Four Devils, 340, 355n11 
Four Dhyanas, 342, 355nH 
Four Diseases, 273 
Four Divisions, 610, 6Hn3 
Four Edges, 197, 199n11 
Four Elements, 36nll, 102, 161 
Four Ends, 197, 199nll 
Four Formless Dhyanas, 355nH 
Four Formless Heavens, 663, 672-73n2 
Four Good Thoughts, -485, i97n21 
Four Ills, 28, 36n11 
Four Immeasurable Good Wills, -485, 
497n21 
Four lmmeasurables, 250, 258n12 
Four Infinite Thoughts, 250, 258nl2 
Four Infinite Wishes, 192, 199n5 
Four Infinities, 170, 188n25, 250 
Four Initiations, 161, 176, 189n37, 255 
Four Moments, 359 
"Four Parables and Five Meanings," 
H6-47 
Four Powers, 232, 240n7 
Four Rainbow Cakras (Rainbow Place 
or State of the Four Cakras), 369, 
372-73n2 
"Four Renunciations," H5-56 
Four River-like Teachings, 161, 187n5 
Four Rivers, 164, 188n12, 340, 355n 
Four Sufferings, 114, 118n1 
Four Symbolic Initiations, 2, 8n7 
Four Tantras, 2-49, 250 
Four Unlimited Good Wills, 170, 188n25 
Fourfold Body of Buddhahood, 346 
"Fourfold Warning," 601-2 

--- PAGE 733 ---
INDEX 
Fourth Body of Buddha (Svabhavikakliya), 506n9 
Friendliness, Unlimited, 188n25 
Fruit (Accomplishment), 126, 130nn5,6,7, 212 
Fruit-bearing Consciousness (Alaya 
Consciousness), ll2nl 
Full-ripening Karma, see Karma, ripened 
Gambopa, 456, 462, 463-96, 545 
GaiJ~sa. 10n33 
Garakhache Guest House, 150-56 (XIsrim 
Garu4a, 10n33 
Garuda bird (Golden Eagle or Kingbird Eagle), 6, 10n29 
Gautama Buddha, 140, 342, 682; see 
also Buddha; Sakyamuni 
gCod Yoga, 66n4 
gGod. School,402n5 
Gebha Lesum, 1 36 
Gelugba School, see Yellow School 
General Buddhist Rules, 414, 420n6 
Geninma, 414, 420n5 
Cesar, King, 306, 311n8 
Ghadamba Lama, 472-76 passim 
Ghadamba School, 466, 496n8 
Ghadaya, 275 
Ghagyuba School, 36nl2, 258n5, 496nl; see dlso Whispered Transmission 
School 
Ghagyuba traditions, 476-77 
"Gift from Man and Deity," 294 
Gifts: from King of Ye Rang and Ko 
Kom, to Milarepa, 288-94; of people, to Lamas and story-tellers, I 08, 
ll3n7 
Girl: dream-messenger to Milarepa, 
200; green, appearance and prophecy to Milarepa, in a dream, 159; in 
prophetic vision of Gambopa, 470 
Girl follower of Milarepa, 533-35 
Glory, of the yogi, 576-77 
Coat Hill (Ra La), 108 
Coats, 442-43, 449 
God and father image, 244 
Goddess, semihuman, 544, 548n1 
Goddess and mother image, 244 
Goddesses, 78 
Coh Valley, 187 
Cold: farewell offering by Rechungpa, 
to Milarepa, 399; gift of, by Milarepa, to Rechungpa, 398, 646, by 
Rechungpa, to Lady Dembu, 64748; indifference of Dharma Bodhi 
to, 368; offer of, to Milarepa, 183, 
by Sable Aui, to Milarepa, 409, 
414; offering of, by Gambopa, to 
Milarepa, 473; offering of, by Milarepa, to Marpa, 473, refused, accepted from, and returned to Sable 
Aui, by Milarepa, 410, 414 
Golden Eagle (King-bird Eagle) 6, 
10n29 
Colden Light Siitra, 467 
"Golden Rosary," 353 
Good, 86n3 
Good-offering, 59, 66n4 
Good River, 13 
Gordag, 534, 540n8 
Grace-waves, see Waves of grace 
Gray Cave of Dorje Tson, 225 
Gray Rock Vajra Enclosure, 97-103 
(XIssim 
Gray School (Sajyaba School), 36nl2, 
189n43, 258n5 
Great Affair (Enlightenment), 144, 
149n7 
Great Bliss, 54, 57n43, 246, 248 
Great Bliss of Precious Words, 399 
Great Compassion Lotus Siitra, 463, 
496n2 
Great Compassionate Mind, see dlso 
Bodhi-Mind 
Great Conquering Demon Cave, 570 
Great Demons, attack on Milarepa, 
297-3iO 
Great 
llluminating-Void 
Awareness, 
Great Light, 165; see dlso Clear Light 
Great Perfection, 249, 258nll, 580, 
583n2 
Great Sorceror (nickname of Milarepa), 
3, 9nll 
Great Symbol meditation, see Mahlimudrli meditation 
Great Tree of Sumeru, 15, 21-22nl7 
Great Vehicle, see Mahayana Buddhism 
Great Wisdom, 170 
Green yogi, Gambopa's vision of, 467 

--- PAGE 734 ---
INDEX 
"Growth of Joyfulness," 339-43 
gTsaii.sMyoft.Heruka, 688, 690n5 
Gu Tang, 88-112 passim, 225-36 fXU· 
sim 
Guards of the Eight Divisions, 179 
Guest House of Compassion, 606 
Gungtuzunpo, 207, 214n1 
Guests: unworthy, at the spiritual feast, 
252-55, worthy, at the spiritual 
feast, 251-52 
Guidance, 80-81 
Gung Tang, 106-8 
Guru, 109, 115, 2 ... 9-50; su also Chief 
Guru;- ,importance of, 75, 86n ... , 
117, 118n3, 126, 137-39 passim, 
140; as mind, 198, 199n12; pleasing of, 231; visualization of, ... 92; 
visualized as sitting above head of 
disciple, 75, 86n4, 168, 321, 329, 
379, ... 18-19 
Guru Symbol Goddess, 183 
Guru Yoga, ... 79 
Gurus: of Milarepa, 378-79; three 
qualifications, 5-46, H8n3 
Gurus of the Transmission, 221, ,....3, 
......... 
Gyuar Mo, 417, ... 20n7 
Handprints, in roclt of Milareapa, 28, 
220, 386 
Hardships, of the ascetic life, 268-69 
Harmony, between guru and disciple, 
... 27-28 
Happiness: of Milarepa, 110-12, 153H, 225-26, 291-92, -422, 508-10, 
517-18, 525, 537-38, 608-9, 637-38; 
of Rechungpa,_ i36-37; of the Yogi, 
7 ... ·75 
Happy Village (Town) of Mang Yul, 
Head,. psychic center of, 168, 188n20 
Headprints, in rock of Milarepa, 220 
Heart-air, 43 
Heart-for-Bodhi, 22n20; see also Bodhi-Mind 
Heart-PriiQa ..... 9nl7, 478 
Heart-Wind, see Heart-PriiQa 
Heat Yoga, 9n9, 36n9, 62, 66nl, 67nH, 70,109, 113nl2, 352; see also 
Mudrii Practice; Tsandali Yoga 
Heaven, 91 
Heaven of Conjuration, 302, 311n5 
Heaven of l~vara, 311n5 
Heaven of Og Men, 217, 2Hn5 
Heaven of the White Devas, 91, 9 ... n4 
Heavenly 
Beings, 
9nl6, 
21-22n17, 
present at Milarepa's Initiation, 333 
Heavenly Nun, see Tserinma (goddess) 
Heavenly Yak, 663, 672n1 
Heavens of Form, 663, 673n3 
Hell, 9n16 
Hell-that-Never-Ceases, 666, 673n5 
· Heruka, 57-4, 575n6 
Hevajra Tantra, 2, 8n6, 161 
Hill Goddess, 12 
Hill Goddess Path, 12 
Hill of Mercy, 13 
Hinayiina (Small Vehicle) Buddhism, 
50, 56n35, 185, 189n ... 6, 239n2 
Hinayina Path, 189n ... 6 
Hindrance of Knowledge, 258nH 
Hindrance of Passions, 258nH 
Hindrances, 2H; to Dharima, .. 58-59 
Hinduism, Six Schools of, 224n8 
Holy Chupoa, ... 81 
Home, 119-20; of Milarepa, 537-38 
Horse: offer of, to Milarepa, 162; refusal of, by Milarepa, 163 
Houses, building of, by Milareapa, 62, 
67n11, 8 ... , 87n23, 106, 268, 680 
Houses, Tibetan, 623n1 
"How to Gain Happiness and Avoid 
Suffering," ... 59-61 
Hui Neng, 682 
Hiim, ... 55n1 
Human beings, sufferings of, 66 ... ·65 
Human birth, a blessing, ... 11 
Humor, sense of, in yogis, 57n ... 2 
Hundred-Words Cleansing Ritual, 336, 
35-+n ... 
Hungry Ghosts, 9n16; sufferings of, 
666-67 
Hunter, Milarepa's preaching to, 278Hunters, and Milarepa, 287 
Hwa Yen, 373n3 
14ii, see Right Channel 
ldenticalness-of-Mind-and-PriiQa, 
506n7,68 ... 
Identification-with-Buddha (Arising of 
Self-Buddha Pride), 332n17 

--- PAGE 735 ---
INDEX 
Identification Yoga, 58, 66n2 
Identifying, Transfonning, and Uniting, 510, 512n2 
Identity of all beings and states, 307Identity of all things, 134-3S 
Ignorance, 303 
Illness, I On26 
Illuminating and Nectar-like Rosary 
of Words, 330 
Illuminating Essence, 301 
Illuminating 
Light-of-the-Path, 
352, 
356n30 
Illuminating Void, 10n24, 80, 87nl5, 
188nl4, 249 
Illuminating-Void Awareness, 244 
llluminating-Void of Mind, 376 
Illumination, 87nl5; kinds and degrees of, 128-29, 130nl3 
Illumination-of-Voidness, 10n24 
Illumination-Woman, 174, 188n33 
Illusory Body Yoga, 9n9, 488 
Immanent, Truth, 14, 2lnl2 
Immovable White Goddess, 496n6 
"Immutable and Real Dhanna on 
the Twenty-seven Vanishments, 51Immutable Fair Lady of Heaven, see 
Miyo Lonzonma 
Imperviousness to physical hann, of 
Milarepa, 659-60 
Inborn Mother of the Whispered 
Lineage (Dorje Pagmo), 346, 356nInborn Wisdom of Buddhahood, 356n22 
Incantations, 5, 10n22, Tantric, 149n4 
Incarnation-Bardo, 348, 356n27 
Incarnation Body of Buddha, 
51, 
56n36 
India, Rechungpa's journey to, 397401, 423-24 
Initial Realization of the Path, 103, 
105n18 
Initiation of Dhanna, 495 
Initiation of Divine Speech, 495 
Initiation of Expression-Samiidhi, 495 
Initiation of the Divine Body, 495 
Initiation of the Goddess Kurukullii, 
Initiation of the Vase, 8n7 
Initiation of Vajra-Guru, 495 
Initiations, 140-41 
Innate-Born Bliss, 189n36 
Innate-born Wisdom, 127, 130nll 
Innate Wisdom, 348 
Inner Families, 244 
Inner Teachings of Dem Chog, 183 
"Insane Yogi from gTsaii," see gTsaii. 
sMyon. Heruka 
Insanity, yogic, see Madness, yogic 
Insect, dead man reborn as, Iibera-· 
tion of by Milarepa, 616-17 
Insects, freedom of Bodhisattva's body 
from, 466, 496n4 
Instructions, Milarepa's: to Gambopa, 
476-95 /JIJSSim, to people of Nya 
Non, 626-27 
Instructions of the Four Directives, 
496n9 
Instructions of the Four Series, 474, 
496n9 
Interpenetrating Totality, 13 5n4 
Interruption, 1 On26 
Invitation to pay a visit, offer of, to 
Milarepa, 177-78; refusal of, by 
Milarepa, 178-79 
Invocation Yoga, 58, 66n2 
Jacket, offer of, to Milarepa, 164-65, 
refusal of, by Milarepa, 165-66 
Jade: offer of, to Milarepa, 183; Re· 
chungpa's gift of, to Milarepa in 
guise of beggar, 637, 638-39 
Jal (Deut Jal), 157-58 
Jarbo Ton Drem (demon), 19 
Jaung Chub Tsong (Castle of Bodhi), 
59, 66n5 
Jedor Tantra, 466 
Jen Valley, 190 
Jetsun (tenn), 9nl0 
Jewel, offering of, by Lesebum, to 
Milarepa, 560 
Jeweled spoon filled with yogurt, gift 
of to Milarepa, from Qakinis, 313, 
Jbachil, 466 
Jhajogri Monastery, 466 
Jhajogripa, 466 
Jham Mei, 624-25 
Jhambar Rolbi Lhodroe, 675 

--- PAGE 736 ---
INDEX 
Jhunma, see Left Channel 
Jidun, 401 
Jipu Nimadson, 442 
Jo Shag (Jowo Shagja), 585, 595, 
604n1 
Jomo, 174, 188n32 
Jomo Chod Dan (Stii.pa of the Hostess), 465 
Joro Dritsam, 259 
Joupuva, 23 
Jowo Shagja (Jo Shag), 585, 595, 
604n1 
Joyous Heaven, 410 
Jundhagho (North Horse Gate), 150 
Jung, C. G., ll2n1 
, 
Junpan Nanka Tsan (Sky Castle of 
Junpan), 68, 72n1 
Jupan Drinzonma, 313-30 ~JaSsim 
Jupiter, 36n7 
· 
Ka Be ornaments, 172, 188n29 
Ka Shi Ka cloth, 288-94 ~JaSsim 
Kaliraja, 506n6 
Kapala (skull-cup), 380, 392, 396nKar Chon Repa, 205-6 
Karma, 136, 148n1, 634-35, 663-64; 
ripened, 13, 21n6, 14, see also Law 
of Karma 
Karma Mudra, 135 and 135n6, 352, 
357-61, 361n5, 640-41 
Karma of Wishes, 189n31 
Key-Instructions (Pith-Instructions), 
183, 189n42; Dharma Bodhi on, 
370-71 
Key-words of the Five Elements, 377, 
396n3 
lQlandroma (Qikinis), 33ln8 
Khri.Sroii.lDe.bTsan., Emperor, 687 
Khum Bu, 334 
Kin, spiritual, of Milarepa, 53 3-34 
King of Ko Kom, 401 
King of the Mighty Wheel (Cakravarti), 399, 401 n2 
King of the Nagas, 296, 3 57 
King of Ye Rang and Ko Kom, 288Kle5as, 13, 21n7, 47-48, S6n26, 56n27, 76, 86n3, 86n6, 92-93, 152, 
244, 351; see also Five Poisonous 
Cravings; Passion-Bodhis 
Knowledge (View), 142, 149n6 
Kriya Tantra, 614n4 
Kriyatantra Vehicle, 258n5 
Krunkol Exercises, 364, 365n2 
~antmi, 506n6 
Ku Ju, 467, 523, 578, 653-55 
Kurukulla, Goddess, 183 · 
Kyi, 360, 361n5 
La Shin, 408, 615 
Labar Shawa, 62-64 
Ladgu Lungu, 20 
Lamp of Illuminating Wisdom, 399 
Lan Gom Repa, 456-62 
Langgo Ludu Tson, 257 
Lapu, 242 
Lark, 85 
Las, 360, 361n5 
Lashi Snow Mountain, 11, 26, 200, 
294, 567-69, 570 
"Laughing Vajra" (name given Milarepa), 333 
Law (Dharma), 8n3 
Law-of-Causation, 336, 348 
Law of Karma, 17-18, 302 
Le, 360 
Leading Awareness into the Path, 141 
Leakless Samadhi, 497n22 
Learning, 397-98 
Left Channel, 10n28, 478; see also 
Three Channels 
Leprosy, 109-10, 113nl0 
Lese, 552 
Lesebum, 11, 28-29, 398, 557-62 
Lha, 54n8 
Lha Dro of Orin, 649 
Lhaju Nu Chon, 160 
Lhaman Jalmo, 357 
Lhasa, 585 
Lhasa Chrunon Temple, 265, 274n4 
Lho Draug Wa, 161, 187n3; see also 
Marpa 
Liberation, 128-29, 130n15, 672-73n2; by Milarepa, of dead man reborn 
as insect, 616-17 
Life-Essence, 37n19 
Life Pr81,1a, 163, 188n10, 479 
Life-Tree, 71, 73n7 
Light Cave of Runpu, 114 
Light-of-Death 
(Dharmakiiya), 
343, 
--- PAGE 737 ---
INDEX 
Light of Origin (Mother Light) 356n30 
Light of the Fruit (Light of Union), 
356n30 
Light of the Path (Light of the Son), 
356n30 
Light Yoga, see Toagal Yoga 
Ligor Sharawa, 516-19 
Linba, 38, 39 
Lineage, of Milarepa, 139-40 
Lodahan (Lohida?) River, 312, 357 
Lodun Gedunbum, 
374-95 
passim, 
498-505 
Lodan Sherab, 466 
Logic, 
389, 
396nl0; of Milarepa, 
380-82, 389-91 
Lodhida (Lodahan?) River, 296 
Longing for salvation, of Sable Aui, 
409-10 
Lord of Death, 300, 301 
Lore, 586 
Lotus (woman), 358, 36ln3 
Lotus Cave, 219 
Lowe Lake, 202 
Lun, 593, 604n4 
Ma Goun, 593, 604n4 
Ma Pam Lake, 215-18, 259-63 passim, 
274n2; deities of, 215 
"Mad Yogi from gTsan," see gTsan. 
sMyon. Heruka 
Madhyamika (Middle Way Doctrine), 
8nZ 
Madhyamika School, 130n15; see also 
Middle Way School 
Madness, of Milarepa, 610-13 
Madness, yogic, 185, 189n47 
Magi, 401, 40Zn5, 423 
Magic, black, 267, 274n5 
Magic-Bodies, 166, 188nl5 
Magic Manifestation Web, or Net, 
373n3 
Mahiibrahmii, 673n3 
Mahamahe~vara, 673n3 
Mahamudra (Great Symbol) meditation, l, 8nZ, 55nl5, 66n6, 7Zn3, 
86n3, 94nl, 104n5, 126-27, 129n2, 
130nn5,6,7, 135n2, 142, 161, 183, 
187n5, 
199n1, 
224nl0, 
239n3, 
258nll, 308, 348, 375, 378, 402n4, 418, 419, 457-58, 540n2, 583n2, 684, 686-87, 690n4; four stages 
of, 98-99, 104n1 
Mahamudra Yoga, 8n7 
Mahasampanna Buddhism, 583n2 
Mahayana (Great Vehicle) Buddhism, 
. 9n20, 22n25, 54n3, 55n9, 55nll, 
55nl3, 56n35, 56n58, 76nll, 189n46, 239n2, 286nl, 356n26, 356nZ9, 
420n6, 
519n3, 
583nl, 682 
Mahayana 
Siltralalikara 
(Dodejan 
Sastra), 466 
Mahayana Siitras, 336 
Mahiiyoga Vehicle, 258n5 
Main Dhyana Stage, 187n5 
Main 
Samadhi 
(Actual-MeditationState), 101, i05nl1, 404, 407n4 
Maitwa, see Medripa 
Marne, 246, 248 
Marne Tson Cave, 242 
Mandai, 172, 188n28 
Mai;tc,lala, as sacrificial vessel, 79, 8687nl4; Milarepa's body as, 507; offering of, by I;>akinis, to Milarepa, 
346, 349; painted in cinabar, 476; 
practices, 187 -88n8, 5 51 n2 
Mat~c,lala of Dem Chog Luyipa, vision 
of, 479 
Mai;tc,lala of the Hevajra, red, vision 
of, 479 
Mang, 61 
Manifestation-Void, 188nl4 
Manifestations, and spiritual growth, 
223, 224nll 
Mankind, 9nl6; see also Sentinent 
beings 
Manlun Chubar of Orin, 183 
Mannmo of Linpa Draug, 360 
Manta Tsari, 33i 
·Mantra of Buddha Tsudor, 336 
Mantra of the Jewel Lotus (Mantra of 
Avalokite~vara), 636, 636n2 
Mantra practices, 551n2 
Mantra Yoga, 8n7, 135 
Many-in-One State, 67n20 
Mark (woman), 358, 36ln3 . 
Market, as symbol of Saq~sllra, 566-67 
Marmots, 378 
Mamgo, 586 
Marpa the Translator, 1-4, 8n5, 23, 
87n23, 88, 160-61, 168, 216, 217, 
222, 231, 234, 266, 267-68, 308-

--- PAGE 738 ---
INDEX 
9, 312, 313-14, 321, 333, 341, 347, 
375, 379, 399, 418, 443, 444, 463, 
469, 
474, 
496n1, 
528-29, 
573, 
680; 
admonishments of, 
232-33; 
prophecies 
concerning 
Milarepa's 
places of meditation, 74, 86n2 
Mars, 36n7 
Marvels, 617-18; see also Miracles 
Maya, 33, 37n23, 60, 512n2 
Me Ru Sinha practice, 183 
Means, 70, 73n5 
Means or Virtue, practice of, 67n16 
Measureless Palace, 41, 54n6 
Meat, dried, gift to Rechungpa, 637 
Medicine Valley, 334, 337, 344, 358 
Meditation (Practice), 69-70, 72n3, 
79-80, 250, 560; difficulties in, 14748, practice Of, 414-16; self-confinement for, 36n16 
Meditation belt, 478, 497n12 
Meditation of Distinctive Observations (Meditation and Observation 
of the Distinctive Wisdom), 456, 
462nl 
Meditation of the Great lllumination, 
Medripa, 267, 341, 469, 474, 576 
Megom Repa, 403-6, 585 
Mental activity, ceaseless, 49, 56n29 
Mercury, 36n7 
Merit-possessor, 126, 130n8 
Meritorious Forest of Ahom Chun, 
Merits, 45, 55n22, 304; amassing of, 
101, 104n8; wish-fulfilling, 102, 105nl3 
Middle Way Doctrine, 55n17; see also 
Miidhyamika 
Middle Way (Madhymika) School, 
94n2 
Mila Grubum (Hundred Thousand 
Songs of Milarepa), 679-90 
Mila Khabum (Namthar), 688, 690n5 
Mila Shirah Jhantsan (father of Milarepa), 267 
Milarepa, life of, 679-83 
Mimamsii School, 224n8 
Mind, 29, 87n15, 97-98, 102-3, 105n17, 123-27, 133-34, 683, 684; see 
also Mother Mind; Son Mind;- , 
as Buddha, 100, 104n5; as Guru, 
198, 199n12; setting at rest of, 
503-4 
Mind-Awarenesses, 169 
Mind-energy, see Energy-Mind 
Mind-Essence, 210, 248, 273, 304 
Mind-for-Bodhi, 22n20 
Mind-holding Practice, 227, 239n3 
Mind-Nature, 248 
Mind of Suchness, 42 
Mind-only doctrine, 94n2 
Mind-Practice, 146-47 
Mind-Riding-on-the-Breath, 504, 506n7 
Mindrol Professor, 604, 604n10 
Miracles, 514; performed by Milarepa, 12, 20n2, 24-25, 28, 207, 2089, 218, 220, 368, 385-86, 392, 416, 
429-31, 443-52, 513, 572, 593-94, 
606-7, 613, 629, 637-39, 659-60, 
662, 668-75; see also Footprints; 
Handprints; Headprint; Marvels 
Miyo Lonzonma, 313-30 passim 
Mon, 466 
Monkey (demon), 68 
Monkeys, 82, 85 
Monks, hostility to Milarepa, 513 
Moon, 36n7 
Mother Buddha, 426, 441n1 
Mother-Divinities, 86nl3 
Mother Light (Mother Mind), 105n17, 128, 130n15, 377 
Mother Mind (Mother Light), 103, 
105n17 
Mother of the llluminating Dharmata, 
419,420n11 
Mothers, 61, 66-67n10, 78, see also 
Mother-Divinities 
Mount Gambo Dar, 491-92 
Mount Menlha, 340, 355n9 
Mount Sumeru, 15, 21n15, 410 
Mudra-of-Threat, 660 
Mudra Practice, 175, 189n34 
Mundane Bodhi-Mind, 9-10n20 
Mundane Truth (conditional, dependent, or expedient Truth), 325, 331n15, 407n3 
Mutual vow, see Vow, mutual 
"My Realizations from Meditation," 
375-77 
Myriad Forms, 164 

--- PAGE 739 ---
Myriad Wisdoms, 2-49 
Nac.li-Prar;ta, 303 
Nac.lis (Roma and Junma), 32, 37n21, 82, 87n19, 135, 161, 376, 
377; see also Three Channels 
INDEX 
Naga King, 15, 22n18 
Nagarjuna, 195 
Nakedness, and shame, 175-76, 578Namthar (Mila Khabum), 688, 690n5 
lilan.rDson.sTon. Pa., 688 
Naro Bhun Chon, 215-23 
Naropa, 3, 9n9, 19, 22n26, 161, 183, 
217, 225n6, 266, 267, 341, 34647,379,469,474,576 
Nature of Mind, 53 
Neck-ornament, jade, offer of to Milarepa, 168-69, jade, refusal of, by 
Milarepa, 169 
Nectar and Power River, 3 34 
"Nectar of Instruction," 75-77 
Nectar of Non-outftowing, 54, 57n44 
Nectar of Samaya, 29, 36nl3 
Neutrality, 527-28 
New Place, 471 
Ngan Tson Dunba Bodhiradza, 330 
Ngan Tson Dunba Shun Chub Jhalbo, 419, 420, 467, 529, 549, 597 
Ngogang, 408 
Ngogom Repa Dharma Wonshu Shawa, see Dharma Wonshu Shawa 
Ngomi, 160 
Ngopa, 594, 604n5 
Ngunbatso Siistra (Abhidharma Ko-
~a), 466 
Ngundojan Sastra (Abhismayalankara), 
Nhamdog, 9n12, 40, 54n4, 307-8, 311n9 
Nidiinas, Twelve, see Twelve Nidiinas 
Nine Essentials, 161 
Nine hard conditions, in practicing 
Dharma, 117 
Nine Successive Vehicles, 249, 250 
Nine Vehicles, 246, 258n5 
· 
Ningmaba School, 258n5, 356n32, 
401, 402n4, 583n2 
26, 504; see also Magic-Bodies; 
Three Bodies of Buddha; Trikaya 
Nirmar;takiiya Castle, 541 
Nirmiir;takaya of the Skull, 341 
Nirviir;ta, 22n27, 86n3, 189n46, 197, 
246, 396n7 
Non-being, 130n9; see also Non-ego of 
Existence 
Non-clinging, 44, 164 
Non-desire (Non-outflow), 112n3 
Non-differentiation, 89 
Non-differentiation of Means and Wisdom, see Non-distinction of Means 
and Wisdom 
Non-discriminating Whole, 87n21 
Non-discrimination, in begging alms, 
152, 156n3 
Non-discrimination, Wisdom of, 21n8 
Non-distinction of Means and Wisdom, 63, 67n16 
Non-distinction Wisdom, 67n15 
Non-distinguishing Wisdom of Dharmadhiitu, 111 
Non-doing, see Non-effort 
Non-dualistic Suchness, see Two-inOne Suchness 
Non-effort, 88-89, 94n1 
Non-effort Fruit, 142, 149n5 
Non-effort Path, 142, 149n5 
Non-effort Root, 142, 149n5 
Non-ego of Existence, 126, 130n9; see 
also Non-being; Voidness 
Non-ego of Personality, 126 
Non-existence-of-Self-and-Others, 248 
Non-men, 10n21, 12-20 passim, 6061; see also Asuras; J;>akinis; Demons; Devas; Heavenly beings; Hungry Ghosts; names of specific supernatural beings 
Non-outflow (Non-desire), 107, 112nNon-Practice, 99, 104n1 
Nonsense, 87n18 
Nonyul, 416 
North Horse Gate (Jundhagho), 150 
North Shri Ri, 159 
Northern Continent (Uttarakuru), ll8n2 
Nu Yin, 318 
Nirmiir;takaya of Buddha, 89, 104n3, 
140, 188n15, 343, 346, 352, 356nNuns, visit to Milarepa, 74-85 
Nya Chen Yor Mo, King of the fishes, 

--- PAGE 740 ---
6, 10n30 
Nya Non, 131, 177-79, 187, 371, 372, 
374, 47-1, 557, 566, 578, 626 
INDEX 
Nya Non Tsar Ma, 11-20 passim, 2331 passim 
Nyal, 586 
Nyan Chung Repa of Gung Tang, 
Nyan Yuan Cave of Chu Mdo, 294 
Nyantsa Karjan (mother of Milarepa), 267 
NyAya School, 224n8 
Nyi Shang Cur Da Mountain, 275 
Nyi Shang of Mon, 287 
Nyi Tong, -465 
NyiWa,4M 
Nyurumpa, -466 
Objectivity, 55nl8 
"Ocean of Sarpsara," 538-39 
Occult Bodhi-Mind, 67nl5 
Occupations, of Milarepa, 558 
Odors, as nourishment for Non-men, 
356n28 
Offerings: by I;>llkinis, to Milarepa, 
357-60 passim; of patrons, to Mil· 
arepa, 580, 601, 626, to Rechungpa, 59-4 
Old age, suffering of, 55-4-55 
Old School, 9n2 
On1, i55nl 
One Hundrea Dorma Offerings, -467 
· One-Pointedness, 98, lOinl 
One-Taste, 99, lOinl, 132, 135ni 
Oral Lineage, see Whispered Trans· 
mission 
Oral Succession, see Whispered 
Transmission 
Oral Transmission, see 
V\~ispered 
Transmission 
Oral Transmission School, see Whis· 
pered Transmission School 
O.:gans, 101; see also Six Groups 
Original Inborn Wisdom, 32, 37nl8 
Originally Pure, 222, 22in9 
Other Shore, 389, 396n7 
Oujen (Pure Land of Padma Sazpbhava), 108, 113n6, 122 
Outer Pointing Guru, 140 
Outer Teachings of Tsudor Namjhal, 
Padma Sarpbhava, 55n23, 55n24, H3 
Padru, 187 
Pagmo practice of the Whispered 
Lineage, -476 
· 
Pagoda, Milarepa's transformation of 
himself into, 368 
Pai Practice -(Teaching of Pai), Hl42, H9ni . 
Palace of the Nirmll1,1akllya of Chu 
Bar, 361n1 
"Parable of the Twenty-two Family 
Members," 244-57 
Pllramitll (Reaching the Other Shore), 
396n7 
Pllramitlls, 2Hn3; see also Six Pllra· 
mitlls; Ten Pllramitlls 
Parents, Milarepa's, salvation of, 619· 
Parittllbha, 673n3 
Parittagubha, 673n3 
Passion-Bodhis, 325, 33ln12 
Passionate Winds, 166, 188n16 
Passions, 1 On26; see also K!egas 
Path, 126, 130nn5,6,7; following of, 
Path of Bodhi, H, 21nH 
Path of Liberation (Yoga without 
Form), 68-4, 686-87 
Path of Means (Yoga with Form), 
268, 685-86 
Path of Secret Words (Path of Tantra), 586, 60in2 
Path of the Cemetery, -40, 54n5 
Path of Two-in-One, 8-4, 87n28 
Path with Form, 87nl9; see IJlso Arising Yoga; Perfecting Yoga 
Patron Buddha, 109, 188n8, 286n2, 
329, -423, -463; of Milarepa, 85, 87n29 
Patron-Buddha-Identification Yoga, 
332n17 
Patrons, worthy, rarity of, 599-600 
Paugba Wadi, 265, 274n3 
Paupers, 
Milarepa's appearance 
as, 
-469-71 
Perfect-Mutual-containing, 87n21 
Perfect Wisdom, see Prajfillpllramitll 
Perfecting Yoga, 19, 22n27, 63, 67n18, n19, 70, 76, 86n7, 187n5, 
199nl, H8, -405; see also Karma 
MudrA 

--- PAGE 741 ---
Perfection, 396n7 
Perfection of Merit, 636n1 
INDEX 
Perfection of Wisdom (Prajfiaparamita), 214n3, 636n1 
Phuyagzha of Orin, 530 
Phyag, 360, 361n5 
Pigeon and the Boat at Sea, 504, 
506n8 
Pigeons, appearance of Devas as, 88-93 
P'ing ch'ang hsin, 540n2 
Pi1.1gala, see Left Channel 
Pinnacle Teachings, 358 
Pith-Instructions (Key-Instructions), 
183, 189n42 
Pith-Instructions of the Whispered 
Lineage, 272 
Plain mind, 526, 540nZ 
Playwords, 87n18, 98-99, 104nl, 104n2 
Pleasures: earthly, worthlessness of, 
534-35; of men and Devas, 663 
Pointing-out exercise, 640 
Pointing-out-Instruction, 124, 129n2 
"Pointing-out the Wisdom of the 
Four Blisses," 530 
Possessions, 150-51; freedom from, 288; 
of Milarepa, 106-8; offer of, to Milarepa, by Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje, 
281-86; spiritual, of Milarepa, 2078, 290, 533-34 
Pot, with curse on it, 109, 113n9 
Powers, miraculous, offer of, by I;>likinis, to Milarepa, 322-23 
Practice, 29, 141, 212; see also Meditation;- ,constant, as most pro 
found teaching of Buddhism, 495; 
emphasis of Tantrism on, 683 
Practice Lineage, 184, 189n45; see also 
Ghagyuba School 
Practice of Seven Words, 183 
Practice of Voidness (Mahamudra), 
8n2 
Practiced Succession (Ghagyuba), 28, 
36n12 
Prajfia, 70, 130n16, 214n3 
Prajfiaparamita (Perfect Wisdom), 67n16, l30n15, 214n3, 295n2 
Pra1.1a, 4, 9n17, 28, 82, 87n19, 135, 
161, 297, 310n1, 491, 497n27, 684, 
690n3 
Pra1.1a-Mind, 25, 35-36n2, 58, 66n2, 
109, 163, 166-67, 189n49; see also 
Energy Mind 
Pra1.1a of Vital Force (Life Pra1.1a), 
163, 188n10 
Pra1.1a powers, in animals and fishes, 
Prii1.1a Yoga, 8n7 
Pra1.1as, 375, 376; see also Five Prii1.1as 
Pratyekayana Vehicle, 258n5 
Prayer: of Milarepa, 625-26; Rechungpa's, to Milarepa, 591-92, 645-46 
Prayer-flags, 5 58, 562n2 
Prayer of Taking Refuge, 236-38 
Precepts, violation of, 46, 5 5n24 
Precepts of Five Virtues, 127, 130n10 
Preparatory Practice, 190, 199n1 
Preta, 500, 506n4 
Pride, Milarepa's advice to Rechungpa concerning, 424-25 
Primordial Buddha, 214n1 
Primordial Consciousness, 56n38 
Primordial Trikiiya, 250 
Probationship, of Milarepa, 100-3 passim, 104n6 
"Proclamation of the Hindrances," 
299-301 
Profound Path, 76, 87n5 
Progress, spiritual, of Milarepa, 131 
Prophecy: concerning new disciple, 
made by I;>akinis, to Milarepa, 236; 
Milarepa's, of Rechungpa's entanglement with a woman, 593; Rechungpa's, of meeting again with 
Milarepa, 646-47 
Propitious Goddess of Long Life, see 
Tserinma 
Provi~ion of Merits, 295nZ 
Provision of Wisdom, 295n2 
Provisions, spiritual, for Rechungpa's 
journey to Weu, 596-97 
Pu1.1yaprasava, 673n3 
P1.1re Land, 122 
Pure Land of Great Bliss, 346 
Pure Land of Joy, 329, 332n16 
Pure Land of No-Regression (Buddha's Pure Land), 346, 356n21 
Pure Land of Padma Sal'jlbhava (Oujen), 108, 113n6 
Purification of sins, 230n7 
Queen of the Azure Heights Snow 

--- PAGE 742 ---
INDEX 
Mountain, 312, 318, 334, 339 
Ra La (Goat Hill), 108 
Radiant Valley of Remedy, 63, 67n17 
Radun Dharma Lhodre, 374-95 passim 
Ragma, 59-65 passim 
Rahu, 36n7, 41, 334; see also Chamju;-, vision of, 478 
Rainbow Body, 354n1, 372-73n2 
Rainbowlike Body of the Mind, 334, 
354n1 
Reaching the Other Shore, 396n7 
Realization, 76-77, 86n9, 86n12, 406, 
437-38; see also Enlightenment;-, 
emphasis of Tantrism on, 683; impediments to, 194-97 
Realm of Great Light, 14, 21n9 
Realm of Hungry Ghosts, 302 
Realm of Infinite Consciousness, 67273n2 
Realm of Infinite Space, 672-73n3 
Realm of Neither Consciousness nor 
Non-Consciousness, 672-73n2 
Realm of Nothingness, 672-73n2 
Realm of Totality, 373n3 
Rechin Meditation Cave, 416 
Rechung Dorje Dragpa, see Rechungpa 
Rechungma, 259-74 
Rechungpa, 108-12, 112-nB, 221, 22633, 259-73 passim, 291-94, 366-68 
passim, 382-84, 386, 392, 397-401, 
416, 421-40, 442-55, 467, 473, 474, 
489-90, 498-502 passim, 523-30 Passim, 545, 549, 550-51, 563-69 passim, 571-73 Passim, 576-83, 584604, 625, 637-48, 670, 690n5 
Rechungdordra, see Rechungpa 
Reciting-the-(words-of-] 
Essence, 329 
Red and White Elements, 102, 105n14, 175, 189n35, 377, 488, 497n23, 508 
Red and White Forces, see Red and 
White Elements 
Red Element, 229, 239n4 
Red Lightning Lady (bitch}, 
27786 passim 
Red Rock Jewel Hill (Height), 26064 passim 
Red Rock Jewel Valley, 1, 8n1 
Red Rock of Drin, 416 
Red Rock Heights of Drin, 507, 509 
Red Tig Le, 479, 497nl4 
Regba Dhujen Cave of Dinma Drin, 
Refuge of the grieved, 410 
Refuge-seeker, 125 
Relatives, 121-22 
Relaxation, 222, 224n10 
"Relieving All Sorrows," 609-10, 613n1 
Remedies, 80, 87n15 
Repa (term), 87n22 
Repa Dharma Wonshu, see Dharma 
Wonshu Shawa 
Repa Sangje Jhap, 123-29 
Repa Shiwa Aui (the Cotton-clad 
Light of Peace), see Shiwa Aui 
Reply, Rechungpa's to Milarepa's test, 
Reproof of Rechungpa, by Milarepa, 
443-53 passim 
Reproof of Yaugru Tangbha, by Milarepa, 154-56 
Retaining-Mindfulness, 169, 188n21 
Retribution-Karma, 166 
Reward-Body of Buddha (Sambhogakiiya), 224n7, 239n5 
rGya, 360, 361n5 
Rig Ma, 546, 548n2 
Riga Daya Cave, 287 
Right Channel, 10n18, 478; see also 
Three Channels 
"Right Yoga Practice," 202-3 
Rin Chin Drags, 647 
Ripened Karma, see Karma, ripened 
Rite of Deliverance, 617 
Ritual of Cleansing with Vase-Water, 
River-Flow Samiidhi, 275, 287 
River of Benevolence, 527 
Riwo Balnbar, 38, 58, 61 
Rluft, 690n3 
Road of Miraculous Light, 334 
Rock, miracle performed by Milarepa 
with, 386-87 
Robber follower of Milarepa, 631 
Robbers, conversion of, by Milarepa, 
630-31 

--- PAGE 743 ---
INDEX 
Roma, see Right Channel 
Ron Chon Repa, 238 
Rondunlaga, 267 
Root of mind, 665 
Root Principle, 192 
"Rosary of Blis$-Void Wisdom," 35960,361 
"Rosary of Pearls,'' 310 
Royal Samiidhi Sdtra, 463 
Rtor Legs, 246, 248 
Ruler of Nam Lo, 299 
Saddle Cave, 97 
Sable Aui, 408-20 
Sajya Monastery, 183, 189nH, 471 
Sajyaba School, see Gray School 
Sakyamuni, 217, 222; see also Buddha; Gautama Buddha 
Salvation, 666; of dead man, through 
Milarepa, 616-17 
Samiidhi, 9n12, 20-21n3, 21n4, 67n18, 189n46, 249, 598, 605n8; 
see also Ensuing Samidhi; Main 
Samiidhi 
Samiidhi of "Elements-Exhaustion," 
313, 331n3 
Samadhi of Great Compassion, 59 
Samiidhi of Guru-Union, 160, 187n1 
Samidhi of Mahiimudrii, 461 
Samadhi of Mercy, 12, 20-21n3 
Samadhi of Non-discernment, 178 
Samadhi of Non-permanence, 70, 73n4 
Samadhi-of-Solidfying-Space, 385 
Samiidhi-of-Space-Exhaustion, 386 
Samadhi of Suchness, 61, 84 
Samiidhi of the F1owing River, 59, 
66n6 
Samiidhi of the Three-in-One Trikiiya, 508 
Samantabhadra, 562n3 
Samaya, 29, 36nl3 
Samaya Commandment, 382 
Samaya-Sattva, 550, 551n3,4 
Sambhogakaya, 103, 104n3, 139, 188n15, 224n7, 343, 346, 352, 356n26, 504; see also Magic-Bodies; 
Three Bodies of Buddha; Trikiiya 
Sambhogakaya Buddha's Pure Land, 
vision of, 490 
Sameness of SamsAra and Nirval}a, 
130n15 
SA~pkhya School, 224n8 
Sa~psilra, 9n16, 22n22, 55n18, 60, 86n3, 91, 94n4, 128, 130nl5, 152, 
164, 165, 188nl2, 197, 209, 244, 
246, 258n3, 302, 304, 308, 411-14, 
Sa~psiira-Nirviil}a Bardo, 348 
Sa~pvara (Dem Chog Luyipa), 479, 
497nl5 
Sa~pvara (Korlo Dompa), 221 
Samye Temple, 585 
Sang Jye Jhab, 183, 187 
Sangdan Dranma, 464 
Sangha, 9nl4 
Sails.rGyas.rGya1.mTshan, see gTsan.-
sMyoil. Heruka 
Sarat Chandra Das system, 689, 691· 
n7 
Satum, 36n7 
Scholar-monks, hostility to Milarepa, 
374-95 
Scripture of the Whispered Succession, 489 
Seba Valley of Nyal, 464 
Secret Doctrine, to be withheld from 
the unworthy, 392-93 
Secret Initiation, 8n7 
Secret Word Doctrine, 490, 497n26 
Seed or cause of Buddhahood, 396n11 
Self-awareness, 43, 55n15, 72, 73n8, 
246,249 
Self-Buddha, 377 
Self-Buddha Pride, 329, 332n17 
Self-deception, 128, 130nl3 
"Self-Examination," 268-69 
Self-illumination, 72, 73n8,170 
Self-liberating Forms, 248 
Self-liberation MahAmudrii, 399 
Self-Manifestation, 248, 273 
Self-mind, 29, 577, 583n1 
Self-rapture, 72, 73n8 
Semodo of Namtsoshumo, 274 
Senses, 101; see also Six Groups 
Sentient beings, 3, 9n15, 92, 105nl3, 
304, 351-52, 683-84; aid to, 292; 
differing capacities of, 239n2; Milarepa's benefits to, 625; parental 
relationship to each other, 286n3, 
303, 3lln7; salvation of, 42, 55n9 
Sevan Dunba, 473 
Sevan Jashi Bar of Dodra, 597 

--- PAGE 744 ---
Sevan Repa (Sevan Dunchon Shawa), 
156, 190-98, 453, 467, 498-502 
Ptusim, 597, 660, 668 
"Seven Adornments," 14-16 
"Seven Discoveries,'' 228-29 
INDEX 
Seven Healing Buddhas, vision of, 490 
Seven Holy Jewels, 84, 87n25 
Seven Main Oblations, 470 
Seven Offerings, 560, 562n3 
Seven Precious Articles of Royalty, 290, 
295nl 
Seven Trinities of counsel, 400-l 
Ser, 267, 27in5 
Seyi Lhamo (demon), 61 
Sha Yul, 472 
Shadulwa Tsinpa, 466 
Shaja Guna, 12, 24-30 p,usim, 131-35 
passim 
Shajhama, 354, 356n33, 358, 36ln3 
Shambo Snow Mountain, 645 
Shamboche, 490 
Shame, 175-76, 578-80 
Shangchub Bar, 190-97 
Shangcliub Jarbo, 197-98 
Shangon Repa, 526 
Shapa Linpa, 466 
Shar Bo Forest, 645 
Sheep, slaughter of, 566 
Sheep-owners, visit to Milarepa, 658-59 
Shell ([Conch] woman), 358, 36ln3 
Shen Gom Repa, 257, 291-94 
Shepherd follower of Milarepa, 532-33 
Shilabbaro of Nepal, 366 
Shin Ore, 247, 248 
Shindormo, ll-12, 23-33 p,usim, 398, 
552-57 
Shiwa Aui, 159-87, 330, 361, 467, 
473, 474, 489-90, 529, 541, 597, 
616, 618, 625, 640, 662, 664, 667, 
Shiwa.Hod., 688 
Shoes, offer of, to Milarepa, 163-64, 
refusal of, by Milarepa, 164 
Shojigocha, H3 
Shortcomings, in spiritual behavior, 
559-60 
Shri Ri, 157-58 
Sickness, suffering of, 55 5 
Sicknesses, 55 5, 562nl 
Siddhis, two, 153, 156n6 
Sidpa Bardo (Bardo of Rebirth), 348, 
352, 355n20; see also IncarnationBardo 
Signs, twenty-four, in dreams of Cambopa, 480-83; interpreted by Milarepa, 483-87 
Silk Cave (Zhaoo Pug), 108-12 p,usim 
Simultaneously Born Wisdom, 37n18, 
89,87n16 
Singalin, 7i 
Singing bird of Jolmo, 528, 540n5 
Six Adornments, 575, 575n7 
"Six Assurances on Facing Death,'' 
607-8 
Six Blissful Experiences of Meditation, 
Six Consciousnesses, 21n10 . 
"Six Deceptions,'' 362-63 
Six Dharmas of Bardo, 347-49 
Six different tastes, 614n6 
Six Elements, 665, 673n5 
Six Essences of Knowledge, 31, 32 
"Six Essences of Meditative Experience," 30-33 
"Six Essentials," 97-98, 545-57 
Six Fetters, see Six Ropes 
"Six Gatherings," 364 
"Six Goodnesses of Mila,'' 364 
"Six Greatnesses," 363-64 
Six Croups, 14, 2lnl0, 94n3, 303; 
see alBO Six Senses and Sense Objects 
Six Groups of Consciousness, Ill 
Six Guides to Devotion, 545-47 
Six Inner Faults, see Six Inner Misconducts 
Six Inner Misconducts, 31-32 
"Six Joys,!' 364 
"Six Keeps," 364 
Six Lokas, see Six Realms; Six Worlds 
Six Obstacles to Liberation, see Six 
Ropes 
Six Parables of Outer Appearances, 31 
Six Paramitas, 22n20, 99-100, 387-88 
"Six Positive Joys of the Mind,'' 608-9 
Six Realms (Lokas), 3, 9nl6; 42, 55n10, 165 
"Six Resolutions,'' 100-3 
Six Ropes, 31, 32 
Six Schools, see Hinduism, Six Schools 
of 
Six Sense Objects, 2 1 n 10 

--- PAGE 745 ---
INDEX 
Six Senses and Sense Objects, 89, 94n3 
Six sexual attractions, 614n6 
"Six Sufficiencies," 438-39 
Six Unshakable Realms of Essence, 
see Six Essences of Knowledge 
Six Ways of Liberation, 31, 32 
"Six Ways of Thinking of My Guru," 
Six wondrous enjoyments, 613, 614n6 
Six Worlds (Lokas), 55n10 
Six Yogas, Teaching of, 187n5 
Six Yogas of Naropa, 3, 9n9, 183 
Skandhas, 300, 303, 304, 3lln4 
Skillful Path (Yoga with Form), 161, 
187n4 
Skillfulness (Upaya), 208, 214n3 
Skran-blindness, 245, 258n4 
Skull-cup (Kapala), 380, 392, 396nl3 
Skulls, offering of, 19, 22n29 
Sky Castle of Junpan, see Junpan Nan· 
ka Tsan 
Sky Castle on Red Rock Mountain, 
Small Tamarisk Forest, 498, 506n1 
Small Vehicle, see Hinayana Buddhism 
Snow Country, 296 
Snow leopard, Milarepa's appearance 
as, 24-25 
Snow lioness, see Darsen Gharmo 
Snow Mountain of the Lady of Long 
Life (Blue Heights of the Fair Goddess), 541-42 
Snowfall, as prevention of evil-doing, 
27, 36n8 
Snowshoe Rock, 28 
Solitude, achievements made possible 
by, 368-71 
Soma plant, 650, 652n1 
Son, 120-21 
Son Light (Son Mind), 105n17, 128, 
130n15, 377 
Son Mind (Son Light), 103, 105n17 
"Song of a Lunatic," 610-13 
"Song of Dangers and Fallacies," 
184-85 
"Song of the Golden Rosary," 354 
"Song of the Seven Truths," 16-17 
"Song of the Six Bardos," 230-31 
"Song of the White Staff," 191-94 
"Song of Transience with Eight Similes, 203-5 
"Song of Transiency and Delusion," 
433-35 
Song of Vajra, 312 
Songs, composed by Milarepa, 681 
Sophisms, 81, 87nl8 
Source-energy, 67nl5 
South River, 267 
Southern 
Buddhism, see 
Hinayana 
Buddhism 
Southern Continent, 15, 21nl6 
Space, miracle performed by Milarepa 
with, 385-86 
Sravakayana Vehicle, 258n5 
Srinmo Demoness, 300 
Staff, of Milarepa, 190, 191-94, 216, 
223n2; see also Cane 
Stock of merits, 45, 55n22 
Stone House of Orin, 653 
Stones, eating of, 62, 67n12 
Store Consciousness, see Alaya Consciousness 
Stream of lllumination, 29 
Stiipa, Milarepa as, 207, 208-9 
Stiipa of the Hostess (Jomo Chod 
Dan), 465 
Subduing-the-Ego, 59 
Subhakrtsna, 673n3 
Subject-Object Fetter, 60, 66n9 
Subjectivity, 44, 55n18 
Succession, 50, 56n33 
Successive Steps of Completion, or Perfection, 22n27 
Successive Steps toward Creation, 22n2.7 
Suchness, 42, 55nl2; see also Two-inOne Suchness 
Sudar5ana,673n3 
Sudnam Rinchin, the Precious Merit· 
orious One, see Gambopa 
Sudr~. 673n3 
Sufferings, as Divine Instructions, 249 
Suicide, threat of, by Shiwa Aui, 179Sumeru, 15, 2lnl5; Great Tree of, see 
Great Tree of Sumeru 
Sun, 36n7 
Sun-moon seat, 655, 657n1 
Sungdu Tantra, 466 
Sunlight Happy Cave of Draugmar 

--- PAGE 746 ---
INDEX 
Bouto, 467 
Siinyata (Voidness), 8n2, 62, 84, 87n27, 92, 101, 130nl6, 249; see 
also Voidness 
Superb Dumo Instruction, 479, 497nl6 
Superlative Bliss, 189n36 
Supramundane Jewels, 107, 112n2 
Supreme Tantra, see Anuttara Tantra 
Siitra (exoteric) doctrine, 2 58n 5 
Svabhiivikakiiya, 504, 506n9 
Swastica-Bon 
(Swastika-Body), 
216, 
223n3 
Swastika-Body 
(Swastica-Bon), 
216, 
223n3 
Sword of Heavenly Iron, 194, 199n7 
Symbol, Dharmic, Milarepa's independence of, 507-8 
Symbolic Initiation, 8n7 
Sympathetic Joy, Unlimited, 188n25 
Tai Tsung, Emperor, 687 
Taking Refuge, 125, 130n4 
Tantra Hevajra, 341 
Tantra of Den Yi, 341 
Tantra of Mahiimiiya, 341 
Tantra of Sungdue, 341 
Tantra of Sungwa Nyinpo, 466 
Tantras, Four, 610, 614n4 
Tantric (esoteric) doctrine, 258n5 
Tantric Madness, 312, 331n2 
Tantrism, 8n7, 56n38, 67n15, 86n4, 
86n5, 130nn5,6,7, 130nll, 130nl5, 
188nl0, 355nl5, 356n29, 356n32, 
373n3, 396nl3, 455n1, 462n2, 490, 
497n26, 506n7, 604n2, 683-87; of 
Milarepa, 681-82 
Tao, 540n2 
Tara, Mother of All Mercy, 288, 294 
Tasting-as-one, see One-taste 
Tathagata, 14; see also Buddha 
Too, offering of, by Gambopa, to Milarepa, 473 
Teaching of Milarepa, prophecy of 
Gambopa as receiver of, 468-69 
Teaching of Pai (Pai, Practice), 14142, 149n4 
Teachings, 141; given by Marpa to 
Milarepa, 268; special, to be found 
in India, 399 
Temple, offer of, to Milarepa, 173-74, 
refusal of, by Milarepa, 174. 
Ten Bhiimis, 356n29 
"Ten Difficulties," 205-6 
Ten Essentials, 528-29 
Ten Evil Actions, 44 
Ten Evil Deeds, 271 
Ten Evils, 16, 22n21 
Ten Paramitas, 388-89, 396n9 
Ten Retinue Demons, 300 
Ten Virtues, 14, 21nl3 
Tenth Bhiimi, 467 
Test of Rechungpa, by Milarepa in 
guise of seven Repas, 593-94 
Thatness, see Suchness 
Theory of Voidness (Madhyamika), 
8n2 
Theraviida, 682 
Third Initiation, (Wisdom Initiation) 
352, 356n31, n33 
Thirteenth Stage, 350, 356n29 
"Thirty Admonishments of My Guru," 
232-33 
Thought, habitual, 16, 22n22, 42, 55· 
nll, 66n2 
Thought, limitative, 36n14 
Thoughts: being devoid of, 13, 21n8; 
ever-flowing, 147-48; finite, 29, 36nl4 
"Three Absences," 201 
"Three Accomplishments," 201 
Three aspects, 656, 657n2 
Three Bardos, 346, 355n20 
Three Bindings, 164, 188nl3 
Three Bodies of Buddha, 99, 104n3, 
Three Canons, 249 
Three Channels, 10n28, 377; see also 
Central Channel; 
Left Channel; 
Right Channel 
Three Companions, 169-70, 188n22 
Three Determinations, 599, 605n9 
"Three Enterings," 200-1 
Three Existences, 347, 356n24 
Three Gates, 152, 156n4 
"Three Gatherings," 201 
Three Gems, see Three Precious Ones 
"Three Greatnesses," 200 
Three Identifying Exercises, 303, 311n6 
Three Key Points, 165, 188n14 
Three Learnings, 375, 396nl, 484, 

--- PAGE 747 ---
497n20, 499, 506n3, 523 
Three Lower Realms, 271 
Three Measurements, 172, 188n27 
Three Miserable Paths, 303 
INDEX 
Three Miserable Realms, sufferings of, 
665-66 
Three Nac,lis (Three Veins), 10n28 
Three Perfect Powers (of the lion), 7, 
10n31 
Three-pointed Time, 163, 188nll 
Three-Points practice, 404, 407n5 
Three Poisons, 537, 540n12 
Three Precious Ones, 3, 9nl4, 92, 
109, 112, 178, 302; see also Triple 
Gem 
"Three Proficiencies," 201 
Three Pure Lands, 348, 356n26 
Three Realms (Three Kingdoms), 351, 
484, 497n19; see also Three Worlds 
"Three Sights," 201 
Three Thousand Great Millenary 
Worlds, vision of, 478 
Three Times, 47, 56n25 
Three Vajra Words Recitation (Vajrareciting Yoga), 444, 455n1· 
Three Veins, 6, 10n28 
Three Visualizations, 163, 187-88n8 
Three Worlds, 65, 67n21 
Tibet, 88 
Tig, 360 
Tig Le, 189n36, 192, 359, 575n5, 593, 
604n4; see also Red Tig Le 
Tig Le (Absolute Truth), 32, 37n19; 
see also Bodhi-Mind 
Tig Le (Bindu), 167, 188n19, 478 
Tiger and Leopard Path, 24 
Tiger Cave of Senge Tson (Tiger Cave 
at Lion Place), 74, 86n1 
Tigress, 41 
Tilopa, 217, 266, 379, 611, 614n5 
Tinder-pouch, gift of, to Gambopa, by 
Milarepa, 492 
Tingeyalzunma, 313-30 passim 
To Tse, 528, 540n4 
Toagal Yoga, 353, 356n32 
Tong Lha, 606 
Totality, 87n21 
Toubagha (given name of Milarepa), 
357, 361n2 
Transcendental Bodhi-Mind, 9-10n20, 
67n15 
Transcendental Samadhi, 486, 497n22 
Transcendental 
Truth 
(absolute 
or 
final truth), 331n15, 407n3 
Transformation Body of Buddha, 239n5, 250; see also Incarnation Body 
of Buddha 
Transformation Yoga, 58, 66n2, 566, 
Transience, 203-5 
Transmission of Dorje-Chang, 592 
Treasury of Buddhahood, 391, 396n11 
Tree of Guidance, 80 
Trikaya, 103n3, 211, 214n6, 343, 351, 
355n15,405, 506n~ 508 
Tripitaka, 247, 258n10 
Triple Gem (Three Precious Ones), 
571, 547n3, 651 
Trolgu, see Incarnation Body of Buddha 
Troos (cubits), 199n3 
Trousers, offer of, to Milarepa, 17576, refusal of, by Milarepa, 176 
Trumpet, Gambopa's, 470 
"Truth of Karma," 13-14 
Truth of Totality, see Dharmadbatu 
Tsa, 593 
Tsa Tsa, 465, 536, 540nl0, 557 
Tsan Rigs, 246, 248 
Tsanbu, 263 
Tsandali Yoga, 418, 420n9 
Tsandan, 410 
Tsang, 160, 187n2, 207, 214n2 
Tsanglin Continent, 410, 420n2 
Tsapu Repa, 116-18 
Tsar Ma, 624 
Tsem Chin of La Dud, 366 
Tserinma (goddess), 295-296, 301-2, 
313-30 passim, 357-61 
Tsese, 467, 472-73, 578, 653 
Tsiba Gontin Tson, 525 
Tsiwo Repa, 241-42 
Tsomanma of Nepal, 360 
Tsudor Namjhal Buddha, 183 
Tu, 267, 274n5 
· 
Turban, offer of, to Mila1epa, 167, 
refusal of, by Milarepa, 167-68 
Turquoise, bandit's gift to Milarepa, 
"Twelve Deceptions," 226-27 
''Twelve Happinesses of Yoga," 225-26 

--- PAGE 748 ---
INDEX 
'7welve Meanings of Mind," 71-72 
Twelve Nidanas, 244, 246, 258n3 
Twenty-eight Constellations, 26, 36n6 
'7wenty-one Exhortations for Mind," 
200-1 
Two Benefits, 389, 396n8 
Two Bodhi-Minds, 5, 9-10n20 
Two Gates, 163, 188n9 
Two Hindrances, 250, 258nl4 
'Two in One, 70, 98, 197, 405-6; see 
also Path of Two-in-One; Two-inOne Path 
Two-in-One Path, 170 
Two-in-One Means-Wisdom, 67n16 
Two-in-One-Pointing-out-Demonstra· 
tion, 403 
Two-in-One Realm of Wisdom and 
Means, 326 
Two-in-One Suchness, 63, 67n20 
Two-in-One Voidness-Compassion, 326 
Two Perfections, 631, 636nl 
Two Preparations, 250, 258nl3 
Two Provisions, 290, 295n2 
Two 'l)uths, 326, 331n15, 404, 407n3 
Ultimate Perfection, 22n27 
Ultimate Teaching (Final Teaching), 
239n2 
Ultimate Truth, 22n20, 52-53, 309; 
see cllso Dharmakaya 
Ultimate Unborn Voidness, 170 
Uncle, of Lady Dembu, cured· of leprosy, 648 
Uncreated Dharmakiya, 140 
Uncreated Voidness, 286nl 
"Understanding of Reality," 323-26 
Jnification of the Mother-and-SonLight, 130n15 
Universal Bliss, 248 
Universal Consciousness, 56n38 
Universal Equality, 249 
Universal Harmony, l35n4 
Universal Mirror of Equality, 399 
Universal Realm of the Absolute Essence, 334 
Universal Seed Consciousness (Alaya 
Consciousness), 123, 132, 135n1 
Up-and-down feelings, 75, 86n3 
Upiya, 214n3 
"Up-going Bliss," 312, 330-3ln1 
Upper Gog Tang, 159 
Upper Lowo, 202 
Upper Nyang, 471 
Ups-and-downs, in daily activity, 83, 
87n20 
Urine, Milarepa's, as seasoning for tea, 
Uttarakuru 
(Northern 
Continent), 
11Sn2 
Va~ika School, 224n8 
Vajra, 446 
Vajra Brothers, 412, 420n4 
Vajra-Buddhahood, 3 56n29 
Vajra J;>akini, 103, 463, 549 
Vajra Hell, 49, 56n31, 271, 274n9 
Vajra-reciting 
Yoga 
(Three 
Vajra 
Words Recitation), 444, 455n1 
Vajrasattva, 354n4 
Vajra Yogini: Rechungpa's painting of, 
sanctified, 550-51; union with Milarepa, 550-51 
Vajrayana, 497n26; rules of, 49, 56n30 
Vajrayiina Buddhism, 682 
Vase Initiation, 549-50, 551n2 
Vedanta School, 224n8 
Venus, 36n7 
Victorious Mother of the Crown, 336, 
354n5 
View, 29, 69-70, 72n3, 79-80, 212 
View (Knowledge), 142, 149n6 
View (basic understanding of Voidness), 151, 156n2 
View, Practice, and Action, 370 
View and Practice; 454-55 
View of annihilation-and-non-existence, 
55n1i 
View of existence-and-permanency, 55n17 
Views: high and low, 88, 94n2; wrong, 
43-44 
Vikramasila Monastery, 224n6, 256n23 
Vinayaka, 7, 10n33 
Virtues, basic, of Buddhism, 130n10 
Virtuous Palace Hermitage of Chu 
Bar, 334 
Visions: Dhampa Sangje's, of Milarepa, 607: Gambopa's, 477-79; sexual, shown \:>y demons to Milarepa, 
--- PAGE 749 ---
INDEX 
Visit, Milarepa's, to temple of hostile 
monks, 513-20 
Vital Heat (Dumo), 27, 32, 36n10 
Vital Heat Yoga, 84, 87n24, 166, 167 
Voice, of Milai:epa, 16, 22nl9, 681 
Void, 303; see also Bliss-Void; Illuminating-Void; Manifestation-Void; 
Wisdom of the Void 
Void doctrine, 94n2 
Voidness, 5, 8n2, 10n24, 36nl4, 87nl5, 87n21, 87n27, 129, 151, 156n2, 286nl; see also Non-ego of Existence; Siinyata; Ultimate Unborn 
Voidness 
Voidness of Mental Functions, 248 
Voidness of Mind, 16 
Vow: mutual, 181, 189n41, of Milarepa, 518-19 
Vows, violation of, 46, 55n24 
Vulture, queen of birds, 39, 41-42 
Wadi, 410, 420n3 
Wadi-zunpo, 274n3 
Wala Tsandra, 109-10 
Water, miraculous crossing of, by Milarepa, 159-60 
Water-of-Eight-Merits, 410 
Water-Samadhi (Exhaustion-of-the Elements Water-Samadhi), 571, 575nZ 
Water Wood Crystal Cave, 527 
Waves of Grace, 50, 56n34, 77 
"We See His Merits," 327-29 
Wealth, 122 
Weapons, offer of, to Milarepa, 16970, refusal of, by Milarepa, 170-71 
Web of Myriad Forms (Magic Manifestation Web, or Net), 369, 373n3, 379 
"Welcome to Meditate in Shri Ri," 
157-58 
Welcome to 
Rechungpa, returning 
from India, of Milarepa, 422-23 
Weu, 160, 187nZ, 207, Zl4n2; Re· 
chungpa's journeys to, 584-604 {Jdssim, 645-47 
Wheel Net of NacJi and PraJ;~fi, 399 
Whispered Lineage, 169 
Whispered Lineage of the I;>akinis, 
Whispered Succession, 161 
Whispered (Oral) Transmission, 2, 8· 
9n8, 76, 86n8 
Whispered Transmission School, 8nZ 
White and red, 32 
White and Red Elements, see Red 
and White Elements 
White-bellied Fish, ~ee Dogar Nya 
White Dharma, 7, 10n32 
White Element, 229, 239n4 
White Element (Tig Le), 574, 575n5 
White Rock Mountain (White Rock 
Horse 
Tooth 
[Mountain]), 
398, 
401nl 
White-Stepped Rock, 28 
Wife, 120; offer of, to Milarepa, 173· 
74; refusal of, by Milarepa, 174-75 
Will-for-Bodhi, 16, 22n20 
Wine, shared with Gambopa, by Mil· 
arepa, 473 
Wine to mindfulness, 84, 87n26 
Wisdom (Praji'iii), 70, 73n5, 208, 214n3, 348; cultivation of, 67nl6; ever· 
present, 132, 135n3 
Wisdom, Innate, see Inborn Wisdom; 
Innate Wisdom; Original Inborn 
Wisdom 
Wisdom Buddha, see Buddha Korlo 
Dompa (Sarpvara) 
Wisdom-Father god, 246, 247 
Wisdom Initiation, 8n7, 356n31 
Wisdom-Light, 356n30 
Wisdom of Accomplishment, 248 
Wisdom of Buddhahood, 87nl6; see 
also Simultaneously Born Wisdom 
Wisdom of Equality, Zln8 
Wisdom-of-Four-Blisses, 349, 350-51 
Wisdom. of Non-discrimination, 21n8 
Wisdom of the Void, 248 
Wisdom-of-Voidness, 286nl 
Wisdom-Sattva, 550, 55ln3, 4 
Woman: ability to practice spiritual 
life, 269-70; and Dharma, 136-48; 
as troublemaker, 624; uncharitable, 
death of, 432-33 
"Words of the Gem," 560 
World-Conquering Mother, 216 
World Glory Vajra-Holder Bhik~u, see 
Gambopa 
World of Desire, 67n21 
World of Form, 67n21 
World of Non-form, 67n21 
Worldly pleasures, renunciation of, 

--- PAGE 750 ---
563-69 
Wrathful Buddha Meditation, 5 
Wrathful 
Thunderbolt-Holder 
with 
Eagle Wings, teaching of, 110, 113n15 
Wurmo, 23,25 
Wutso Gabar Jalbo, 464 
Yak-hom, 428-31 
Yama, 3lln2, 501 
Yamiintaka, 297, 298, 310n2 
Yang Nge, 631-36 
Yaugru Tangbha, 150-56 passim 
Ye Shin Dsu Pud, 216 
Ye Pa Dorje (the Laughing Vajra), 
name given by Marpa to Milarepa, 317, 33ln7 
Yei Ru Jang, 150-56 passim 
Yellow (Gelugba) School, 8n2, 36n12,258n5 
Yes and No, 56n40 
Yidagmo of Yolmo Snow Mountain, 
Yidham (Patron Buddha), 286n2; see 
also Patron Buddha 
Yoga, 9n8, 225-26; see also names of 
individual Yoga practices 
Yoga, Arising, see Arising Yoga 
Yoga, Perfecting, see Perfecting Yoga 
Yoga of Bodhi-Mind, 376 
Yoga of Light, 9n9, 348 
Yoga of No-returning, 226, 239n1 
INDEX 
Yoga of Non-wandering, 102, 105nl2 
Yoga of the Patron Buddha, 479 
Yoga of the Phantom Body, 348, 352 
Yoga of Transformation, 9n9 
Yoga School, 224n8 
Yoga Tantra, 614n4 
Yoga with Form (Skillful Path or 
Path of Means), 161, 187n4, 188n9, 684-86 
Yoga without Form (Path of Liberation), 188n9, 684, 686-87 
Yogas of Four Periods, 169 
Yogacara School, 55nll, 55n15, 56n38, 94n2, 130n15 
Yogatantra Vehicle, 258n5 
Yogi, Tantric, of Gu Tang, 97-103 
passim; from Wen, 660-61 
Yogic madness, see Madness, yogic 
Yolmo, goddess of, 74 
Yolmo Snow Range, 74 
Young man follower of Milarepa, 537Young men followers of Milarepa, 657 
Yundun, 267 
Yunlaza, 464 
Yuru Kradrag, 586 
Yutog, Lady, 689-90 
Zen Buddhism, 540n2; see also Ch'an 
Buddhism 
Zhaoo Pug (Silk Cave), 108-12 passim 

--- PAGE 752 ---
THE HUNDRED THOUSA D 
Songs of Milarepa 
The song of Milarepa, chc famous eleventh-cenrurv 
fiberan Duddhist poer and saint. are a synthesis of 
lyric beauty and profound spiritual understanding. 
They form one of che grcar canons of Tibetan 
Buddhist licʼrarure, which sci II spe:lk with poignant 
relevance to the wncemporary mind. This is the 
ooly complete translation of chis impor:am work 
inro English. 
Tht Hur,Jred 1'hormmd Songs of l'tfjlartpa ''has 
been re:id as the biography of a ainc. a guide book 
for dl!'·ocion , a manual of Buddhi c yoga, a volume 
of songs and poems, and even a collccrion of Tibetan 
folklore and fairy rates." However tbc.-y are read, 
fihrer,:i's poems are an engrossing portrayal, filled 
id1 evocacive and colorful imagery. "The Salvation 
of the Dead," ''A Woman's Role in the Dharma," 
and "Challenge from a Wise Demoness" are but a 
few of the tides of the fascinating scories in this work 
which will captivate readers with their dynamic 
insight inro the living quality of Tibetan Buddhism. 
Shambhala 
BOULDER & LONDON