--- PAGE 2 ---
Sixty Songs of Milarepa
Translated by
Garma C.C. Chang
Selected and introduced by
Bhikkhu Khantipālo
Buddhist Publication Society
Kandy • Sri Lanka
The Wheel Publication No. 95 / 97
Copyright © Kandy, Buddhist Publication Society, (1980)
BPS Online Edition © (2008)
Digital Transcription Source: BPS Transcription Project
For free distribution. This work may be republished,
reformatted, reprinted and redistributed in any medium.
However, any such republication and redistribution is to be
--- PAGE 3 ---
made available to the public on a free and unrestricted
basis, and translations and other derivative works are to be
clearly marked as such.
--- PAGE 4 ---
Sixty Songs of Milarepa
Jetsun Milarepa is shown
sitting at ease in front of the
cave at Ghadaya near the
Tibet-Nepal border. Above him
appears the form of his Guru,
Marpa the Translator, since
meditations visualizing a
Buddha or the Guru above the
head, are commonly practised
in Tibet (see also the
Jinapañjara, a Pali
composition). Around him
tower rocks and mountains while waterfalls cascade below.
To his right sits a deer and to his left a hunting dog. Before
him kneels a huntsman who has cast down his weapons as
an offering to the Jetsun (see Song 14). This illustration
follows the traditional iconography of Milarepa, his sitting
at ease indicating that he has already experienced the state
beyond striving. “Wearing cotton from Nepal” and a
meditation-belt and with his hand cupped to his ear as
though listening to the ’long tongue of the Dhamma’
which preaches everywhere and all the time, the great yogi
prepares to instruct the erstwhile hunter.
(The picture above was kindly provided by
the Venerable Dhardo Rinpoche of the Indo-
--- PAGE 5 ---
Tibet Buddhist Cultural Institute, Kalimpong
(W. Bengal).)
--- PAGE 6 ---
Introduction
Outside the land of Tibet where the stories and songs of
Milarepa are very well-known and loved, far too little is
known of this great Buddhist sage. In English, [1] French
and German, biographies, partial or complete, have been
published but a great number of Milarepa’s Songs have
remained inaccessible, except to those reading Tibetan, until
very recently. It is possible to reproduce here sixty of his
songs on the Dhamma through the kind permission of the
translator, Prof. C. C. Chang, and the courtesy of his
publishers, University Books Inc, New York. [2]
The songs printed here all concern that Dhamma which is
common to the whole Buddhist tradition. Everyone who has
read some of Lord Buddha’s Discourses in the Pali Canon
will find the subject matter here familiar to them. The
nearest approach in Pali literature to these Dhamma-songs
of Milarepa are the inspired utterances of Lord Buddha in
the Sutta Nipāta, Udāna and Itivuttaka (and also in the
Dhammapada), and the poems of gnosis spoken by the
great bhikkhus and bhikkhunīs of the Noble Sangha, now
collected into such books as the Theragāthā and Therīgāthā.
Among the Bhikkhus living in the Buddha-time, Vaṅgīsa
Thera was outstanding for his inspired utterances (see Sn
--- PAGE 7 ---
1:8; Theragāthā 395). The mind inspired and illumined with
the knowledge of liberation (vimutti) pours forth its wisdom
with ease in the shape of verses of great beauty and deep
significance. Such was the case with Lord Buddha and some
of his immediate disciples, and later, such was the case with
Milarepa.
His songs have been arranged here according to subject,
though no rigid classification is possible since many of the
songs deal with more than one aspect of the Dhamma. First
come Milarepa’s descriptions of some of his hermitages,
then songs on renunciation and the dangers of saṃsāra,
followed by many more on impermanence. After them
come songs describing different aspects of saṃsāra—such as
the Six Realms of Birth; birth, old age, sickness and death;
and home relatives and wealth. Next are songs relating to
practice—advice on how to practise and warnings about
what not to do; then upon the Six Pāramitā and other such
helpful qualities for practice as loving-kindness (mettā),
striving (viriya) and mindfulness (sati). Last of all come
songs describing aspects of Milarepa’s realization—his
contentment, happiness and non-attachment—concluding
with his blessings to his patrons.
It will be seen from the above sequence that the Teaching
here is not at all strange to Theravāda, including as it does
the Impermanence (anicca) of all things, states, people,
places; that they are impermanent since they arise
dependent upon conditions (paccaya); that what is
conditioned, and therefore relative, is also devoid of
--- PAGE 8 ---
essential being (sabbe dhammā anattā) and void of self
(suñña); and that by not recognizing these truths and by
thinking in terms of permanence, self, etc., we come to
experience unending unsatisfactoriness (dukkha). Milarepa
also points out the way to transcend dukkha and emphasizes
the keeping of precepts (sīla), concentrating the scattered
mind (samādhi) and the development of Wisdom (paññā).
In making comparisons of different Buddhist traditions
many similarities are apt to come to light. One that might be
mentioned here is the immense respect and honour paid to
Enlightened Teachers in any Buddhist tradition, quite
regardless of the differences of time and place. One who has
seen and known the Way from his own experience has
always been lauded as worthy of the highest honour and
the greatest devotion as in Pāli: āhuneyyo, pāhuneyyo,
dakkhiṇeyyo, añjali-karaṇīyo. Indeed, we find this as much in
the pages of the Pāli Canon as from the Hundred Thousand
Songs. It is heard as much in the exalted devotion of Pingiya
(Sutta Nipāta 1131 ff.) as in the paeans of praise uttered by
the principle disciples of Milarepa, Rechungpa and
Gambopa. It is found in modern times in seemingly diverse
surroundings—whether in a jungle monastery in Thailand
where a thudong (dhutaṅga) bhikkhu is respecting his
Teacher; or whether it is Tibetan bhikkhus or laymen
receiving a meditation transmission from their Lama. The
same devotion here finds expression; it is called saddhā or
bhatti (bhakti—a word first occurring in Indian literature in
the Pāli Canon), for this is the act by one still unenlightened,
--- PAGE 9 ---
of setting his heart upon Enlightenment in the presence of
one who is Enlightened.
Then again, the Hundred Thousand Songs many times
mention the “Whispered Transmission” of meditation
instructions which are imparted by the Teacher, here
Milarepa, to his disciples. By some this is contrasted with
the statement of Lord Buddha that He was not a Teacher
who had a ’closed fist’, that is, one who keeps some
Teaching secret or esoteric. Nonetheless, He is well-known
for his remarkable ability in preaching exactly the right
Dhamma to fit the situation and meet the understanding of
those who listened. He did not teach the deep truths of
Dhamma to those who were not prepared as yet to receive
them and in a like fashion Milarepa graded his teachings for
varying circumstances and intelligences.
Meditation instructions given by Lord Buddha to his
disciples were also fitted to their temperaments and
abilities. It is true that one may now read books explaining
the principles of meditation in Theravāda Buddhism, but
with books alone, even if one reads all the Pāli Canon, the
disadvantage remaining is very great. In all Buddhist
countries, it is always assumed that one must have a
Teacher if meditation practice is to be really successful. It is
this Teacher who, like Lord Buddha in past times, imparts
to one the details of the practice and how, moreover, it
applies to one’s special problems and circumstances. As
Bhadanta Nyanaponika Mahāthera has written in his “Heart
of Buddhist Meditation”: ’A brief statement on practical
--- PAGE 10 ---
meditation, even if limited to the very first steps as is done
here, cannot replace personal guidance by an experienced
teacher who alone can give due consideration to the
requirements and rate of progress of the individual
disciple.’ This is, if not a “Whispered Transmission”, at least
an Oral Instruction.
The ’grace’ of the Teacher (guru) consists of those merits
which he has gathered by his own practice and which, it is
believed, may be transferred to the disciple, thus ’blessing’
him. This can only happen, however, provided that the
conditions (of spiritual purity, faith, concentration, etc.)
exist between that master and disciple. It is a great mistake
to suppose that the disciple is getting something for
nothing, for in the absence of these conditions he will
experience no ’help’ from the teacher.
* * * * * *
For the dramatic and very inspiring life-story of Jetsun
Milarepa as written down by a great-grand-disciple in his
tradition, we have but little space here. Those interested in
reading it may consult the book mentioned in the footnotes
above. Suffice to say here that the Jetsun was born in BE
1596 (CE 1052) into a wealthy merchant family. As a boy he
was known as Tubhaga (“Delightful-to-hear”), a name
which people said was particularly appropriate since he had
a fine voice and frequently sang the local ballads. His voice
was later to be used for spreading the Dhamma, and those
who heard it were deeply moved.
--- PAGE 11 ---
Fortunately, Milarepa has given an outline of his life in one
of the songs he later sang for his disciples and we cannot do
better than introduce an extract of it here.
I am Milarepa blessed by his (Marpa’s) mercy.
My father was Mila Shirab Jhantsan,
My mother was Nyantsa Karjan.
And I was called Tubhaga (“Delightful-to-hear”).
Because our merits and virtues were of small
account,
And the Cause-Effect Karma of the past spares no
one,
My father Mila passed away (too early in his life).
The deceiving goods and belongings of our
household
Were plundered by my aunt and uncle,
Whom I and my mother had to serve.
They gave us food fit only for the dogs;
The cold wind pierced our ragged clothing;
Our skin froze and our bodies were benumbed.
Often I was beaten by my uncle,
And endured his cruel punishment.
Hard was it to avoid my aunt’s ill temper.
--- PAGE 12 ---
I lived as best I could, a lowly servant,
And shrugged my shoulders (in bitter resignation).
Misfortunes descended one after the other;
We suffered so, our hearts despaired.
In desperation, I went to Lamas [3] Yundun and
Rondunlaga,
From whom I mastered the magic arts of Tu, Ser
and Ded [4] .
Witnessed by my aunt and uncle, I brought
Great disaster on their villages and kinsmen,
For which, later, I suffered deep remorse.
Then I heard the fame of Marpa, the renowned
Translator,
Who, blessed by the saints Naropa and Medripa,
Was living in the upper village of the South River.
After a hard journey I arrived there.
For six years and eight months (I stayed)
With him, my gracious Father Guru, Marpa.
For him I built many houses,
One with courtyards and nine storeys;
Only after this did he accept me.
(Page numbers in the complete translation: pp. 267–8)
Then Milarepa lists the meditation-instructions which he
was given by his Guru Marpa after he had thus served a
long period of hard probation and tells how by their
practice he reached Enlightenment (see conclusion of this
Introduction).
--- PAGE 13 ---
The name by which he is known in Tibet is Jetsun Milarepa.
’Jetsun’ is an honorific meaning ’holy’, while ’Repa’ means
’clad in cotton’. Mila was a family name. Hence, in English
he may be called Holy Mila the Cotton-clad. He earned the
latter name by his power to live throughout the bitter
Tibetan winter with only one length of cotton cloth. Where
others would have died, he lived happily immersed in the
various states of samādhi producing, by his control of them,
sufficient body heat. After twelve years of intense
meditations in remote mountain caves far from the haunts
of men in the valleys below, he succeeded in winning
Enlightenment. After this time, disciples gradually gathered
around him, the first being Rechungpa, his ’moon-like’
disciple, while later came his ’sun-like’ disciple Gambopa.
[5] His closest disciples went forth from their homes to take
up homeless life with him. Gambopa and some others were
already bhikkhus, while many more such as Rechungpa
were called ’Repa’, that is, yogis clad in one piece of cotton.
Like Lord Buddha, the Jetsun taught Dhamma to all—to the
emissary of a king and to shepherds, to nuns and wealthy
ladies, to bhikkhus and yogis, to bandits and merchants. His
conversion of the hunter, Chirawa Gwumbo Dorje, is as
popular a story in Tibet as is the pacifying of Aṅgulimāla by
Lord Buddha, in southern Buddhist lands.
At the age of eighty, Jetsun Milarepa relinquished the body,
passing away surrounded by disciples both human and
celestial. For 900 years the traditions of meditation in which
he trained his disciples have been handed down in Tibet. It
--- PAGE 14 ---
has come to be known as the Ghagyupa (sometimes seen as
Kargyutpa) which is translated as the “Whispered
Transmission.” This school of Buddhist practice has, of
course, its own special emphasis upon certain doctrines but
songs concerned with them are not included in this booklet
and the interested reader is requested to consult the
“Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa.”
In the time of Milarepa, as is evident from these songs,
many bhikkhus spent long years in study but never gave
much heed to practice. Thus is the divorce of paṭipattidhamma or sīla (moral precepts) and samādhi (meditation),
from pariyatti-dhamma or simply learning. Scholar-bhikkhus
of Tibet were evidently, at that time, very able in arguing
the finer points of Buddhist philosophy and well-equipped
with logic to worst outsiders as well as fellow Buddhists in
debates. Somehow, in the welter of this study (and the
Tibetan Canon and its Commentaries are considerably more
extensive than their lengthy Pāli counterparts), the urge to
practise meditation, many of its foremost exponents were
masters not possessing the monk’s robes. This was true of
the spiritual forebears of Milarepa (his immediate Guru,
Marpa and of the Indian yogis, Naropa and Tilopa). In
several places he criticizes those bhikkhus, and indeed
anyone, who studies the Dhamma just for intellectual
satisfaction or even for worldly advantage. Many sincere
bhikkhus did approach him for meditation instructions and,
thereafter, practised with him as their Teacher. He was,
therefore, a source for the spiritual regeneration of the
--- PAGE 15 ---
Sangha in Tibet.
With his insistence upon the practice of Dhamma, Milarepa’s
life and teaching present striking similarities in many
respects, to the Way as practised by the thudong (dhutaṅga)
bhikkhu. The greatest difference is that a bhikkhu in any
country is bound to observe his Fundamental Precepts
(Pātimokkha) which, as Milarepa did not have the bhikkhu
ordination (upasampadā), he did not have to keep.
Nevertheless, even a quick look at his life after he began his
practice would reveal that he maintained scrupulously
those injunctions given him by his Teacher, Marpa the
Translator, as well as cultivating those twin bases of moral
conduct in the Dhamma, Wisdom and Compassion (paññakaruṇā). Far greater than this are the resemblances between
him and the thudong bhikkhu. For instance, both praise
contentment with little, living remotely with utter
detachment from worldly affairs, great ability in meditation,
and so on.
Though he had not the formal ordination of a bhikkhu and
wore not the monks’ robes, yet Milarepa was truly one gone
forth (pabbajita). No one reading of his life and some of the
songs included here can possibly doubt this. According to
definitions given in the Dhammapada, he was indeed a true
bhikkhu:
“Not by adopting the outward form does one become
a bhikkhu” (266).
“He who has no attachment whatsoever towards the
--- PAGE 16 ---
’mind-and-body’ and who does not grieve for what
he has not,—he indeed, is called a bhikkhu” (367).
“Whoso herein, has abandoned both merit and
demerit, he who is holy, he who walks with
understanding in this world,—he indeed, is called a
bhikkhu” (267). [6]
These various points, and perhaps others, could be raised to
point out that it is in the practice of Dhamma (paṭipatti) that
different schools of Buddhist thought are shown to have
many similarities. Finally, it is in realization of the Dhamma
(paṭivedha) where all divergence ceases, since all the
methods practised by all the schools are without exception
aimed at the experience of Bodhi, or Enlightenment. If the
Dhamma is only studied from books, then many differences
are seen separating the many Buddhist traditions but in
practice there is very much in common. Since all Buddhists
are urged to practise their Teachings, it is through this that
harmony between the divergent traditions of Dhamma may
be discovered.
This little introduction may be concluded with a stanza
drawn from the autobiographical song, part of which is
quoted above. More than this need not be said here, for it is
better that the Jetsun sings to you his inspiring and
Wisdom-inspired Songs of the Dhamma.
“I renounced all affairs of this life;
And, no longer lazy, devoted myself to Dharma.
--- PAGE 17 ---
Thus I have reached the State of Eternal Bliss.
Such is the story of my life.”
Khantipālo Bhikkhu,
Wat Bovoranives Vihāra,
Bangkok, Thailand.
6th of the Waning Moon of Citta 2508
(22nd April 1965).
In the following text, the writer of this introduction is
responsible for the précis stories and the notes, except where
matter is found in parentheses. The latter has been drawn
from the “Hundred Thousand Songs.”
One day, after leaving his cave to collect firewood, Milarepa
returned “to find five Indian demons with eyes as large as
saucers” whom he thought to be apparitions of the deities
who disliked him. As he had never given them any offering,
he then began to sing a—
--- PAGE 18 ---
Complimentary Song to the
Deities of
Red Rock Jewel Valley
This lonely spot where stands my hut
Is a place pleasing to the Buddhas,
A place where accomplished beings dwell,
A refuge where I dwell alone.
Above Red Rock Jewel Valley
White clouds are gliding;
Below, the Tsang River gently flows;
Wild vultures wheel between.
Bees are humming among the flowers,
Intoxicated by their fragrance;
In the trees, birds swoop and dart,
Filling the air with their song.
In Red Rock Jewel Valley
Young sparrows learn to fly,
Monkeys love to leap and swing,
And beasts to run and race,
While I practise the Two Bodhi-minds [7] and love
to meditate.
--- PAGE 19 ---
Ye local demons, ghosts and gods,
All friends of Milarepa,
Drink the nectar of kindness and compassion,
Then return to your abodes.
(p. 5)
One day, Milarepa’s patrons from Dro Tang came to visit
him. They asked him what benefits Junpan Nanka Tsang
had to offer. In reply, Milarepa sang:
I pray to my Guru, the Holy One.
Listen, my patrons, and I will tell you
the merits of this place.
In the goodly quiet of this Sky Castle of Junpan
High above, dark clouds gather;
Deep blue and far below flows the River Tsang.
At my back the Red Rock of Heaven rises;
At my feet, wild flowers bloom, vibrant and
profuse;
At my cave’s edge (wild) beasts roam, roar and
grunt;
In the sky vultures and eagles circle freely,
While from heaven drifts the drizzling rain.
--- PAGE 20 ---
Bees hum and buzz with their chanting;
Mares and foals gambol and gallop wildly;
The brook chatters past pebbles and rocks;
Through the trees monkeys leap and swing;
And larks carol in sweet song.
The timely sounds I hear are all my fellows.
The merits of this place are inconceivable—
I now relate them to you in this song.
Oh good patrons,
Pray follow my Path and my example;
Abandon evil, and practise good deeds.
Spontaneously from my heart
I give you this instruction.
(pp. 68–69)
One day, some villagers from Ragma came to see the Jetsun.
They asked him, “Why do you like this place so much? Why
is it that you are so happy here? Pray, tell us what you think
of all these things!” In answer, Milarepa sang:
Here is the Bodhi-Place, quiet and peaceful.
The snow-mountain, the dwelling-place of deities,
stands high above;
--- PAGE 21 ---
Below, far from here in the village, my faithful
patrons live; Surrounding it are mountains nestling
in white snow.
In the foreground stand the wish-granting trees;
In the valley lie vast meadows, blooming wild.
Around the pleasant, sweet-scented lotus, insects
hum;
Along the banks of the stream
And in the middle of the lake,
Cranes bend their necks, enjoying the scene,
and are content.
On the branches of the trees, the wild birds sing;
When the wind blows gently, slowly dances the
weeping willow;
In the treetops monkeys bound and leap for joy;
In the wild green pastures graze the scattered
herds,
And merry shepherds, gay and free from worry,
Sing cheerful songs and play upon their reeds.
The people of the world, with burning desires and
craving,
Distracted by affairs, become the slaves of earth.
From the top of the Resplendent Gem Rock,
I, the yogi, see these things.
Observing them, I know that they are fleeting and
transient;
Contemplating them, I realize that comforts and
--- PAGE 22 ---
pleasure
Are merely mirages and water-reflections.
I see this life as a conjuration and a dream.
Great compassion rises in my heart
For those without a knowledge of this truth.
The food I eat is the Space-Void;
My meditation is Dhyāna—beyond distraction.
Myriad visions and various feelings all appear
before me—
Strange indeed are Saṃsāric phenomena!
Truly amazing are the dharmas in the Three
Worlds, [8]
Oh, what a wonder, what a marvel!
Void is their nature, yet everything is manifested.
(pp. 64–65)
This song was sung to a young, well-dressed girl who after
asking Milarepa about his father and mother, brothers and
sisters, further enquired: “But do you also have any
Saṃsāric companions, sons and belongings?” Milarepa then
sang in reply:
At first, my experiences in saṃsāra [9]
--- PAGE 23 ---
Seemed most pleasant and delightful;
Later, I learned about its lessons;
In the end, I found a Devil’s Prison.
These are my thoughts and feelings on saṃsāra.
So I made up my mind to renounce it.
At first, one’s friend is like a smiling angel;
Later, she turns into a fierce exasperated woman;
But in the end a demoness is she.
These are my thoughts and feelings on
companions.
So I made up my mind to renounce a friend.
At first, the sweet boy smiles, a Babe of Heaven;
Later, he makes trouble with the neighbours;
In the end, he is my creditor and foe.
These are my thoughts and feelings about children.
So I renounced both sons and nephews.
At first, money is like the Wish-fulfilling Gem;
Later, one cannot do without it;
In the end, one feels a penniless beggar.
These are my thoughts and feelings about money.
So I renounced both wealth and goods.
When I think of these experiences,
I cannot help but practise Dharma;
When I think of Dharma,
I cannot help but offer it to others.
When death approaches,
I shall then have no regret.
--- PAGE 24 ---
(p. 209)
On his way to Shri Ri to meditate, Milarepa lodged at an inn
where a merchant, Dhawa Norbu (the Moon jewel), was
also staying with a great retinue. Milarepa begged alms
from him upon which the merchant remarked that it would
be better for him to work to support himself. Milarepa
pointed out that enjoying pleasures now is the source for
more suffering in the future. Then he said: “Now listen to
my song.”
--- PAGE 25 ---
The Eight Reminders
Castles and crowded cities are the places
Where now you love to stay;
But remember that they will fall to ruins
After you have departed from this earth!
Pride and vain glory are the lure
Which now you love to follow;
But remember, when you are about to die
They offer you no shelter and no refuge!
Kinsmen and relatives are the people now
With whom you love to live;
But remember that you must leave them all behind
When from this world you pass away!
Servants, wealth and children
Are things you love to hold;
But remember, at the time of your death
Your empty hands can take nothing with you!
Vigour and health
Are dearest to you now;
But remember, at the moment of your death
Your corpse will be bundled up and borne away!
--- PAGE 26 ---
Now your organs are clear,
Your flesh and blood are strong and vigorous;
But remember, at the moment of your death
They will no longer be at your disposal!
Sweet and delicious foods are things
That now you love to eat;
But remember, at the moment of your death
Your mouth will let the spittle flow!
When of all this I think,
I cannot help but seek the Buddha’s Teachings!
The enjoyments and the pleasures of this world
For me have no attraction.
I, Milarepa, sing of the Eight Reminders,
At the Guest House in Garakhache of Tsang.
With these clear words I give this helpful warning;
I urge you to observe and practise them!
(pp. 150–151)
Milarepa once said to Shindormo, his patroness: “But if you
have a precious human body and have been born at a time
and place in which the Buddhist religion prevails, it is very
foolish indeed not to practise the Dharma.” Milarepa thus
--- PAGE 27 ---
sang:
At the feet of the Translator Marpa, I prostrate
myself,
And sing to you, my faithful patrons.
How stupid it is to sin [10] with recklessness
While the pure Dharma spreads all about you.
How foolish to spend your lifetime without
meaning,
When a precious human body is so rare a gift.
How ridiculous to cling to prison-like cities
and remain there.
How laughable to fight and quarrel
with your wives and relatives,
Who do but visit you.
How senseless to cherish sweet and tender words
Which are but empty echoes in a dream.
How silly to disregard one’s life by fighting foes
Who are but frail flowers.
How foolish it is when dying
to torment oneself with thoughts of family,
Which bind one to Maya’s [11] mansion.
How stupid to stint on property and money,
Which are a debt on loan from others.
How ridiculous it is to beautify and deck the body,
Which is a vessel full of filth.
How silly to strain each nerve for wealth and
goods,
--- PAGE 28 ---
And neglect the nectar of the inner teachings!
In a crowd of fools, the clear and sensible
Should practise the Dharma, as do I.
(pp. 33–34)
A yogi who had great faith in Milarepa came with other
patrons, bringing copious offerings, and they asked
Milarepa “how he had managed to undergo the trials of his
probationship and had exerted himself…” Milarepa
answered with…
--- PAGE 29 ---
The Six Resolutions
When one has lost interest in this world,
His faith and longing for the Dharma is confirmed.
To relinquish one’s home ties is very hard;
Only by leaving one’s native land
Can one be immune from anger.
It is hard to conquer burning passions
Towards relatives and close friends;
The best way to quench them
Is to break all associations.
One never feels that one is rich enough;
Contented, he should wear humble cotton clothes.
He may thus conquer much desire and craving.
It is hard to avoid worldly attractions;
By adhering to humbleness,
Longing for vain glory is subdued.
It is hard to conquer pride and egotism;
So, like the animals,
Live in the mountains.
My dear and faithful patrons!
Such is the real understanding
--- PAGE 30 ---
That stems from perseverance.
I wish you all to practise deeds that are
meaningful, [12]
And amass all merits!
(pp. 100–101)
Milarepa went out one day for alms and coming to a
meeting of Dharma-followers, was ridiculed. One of them,
however, recognized him and said: “To inspire those
attending this meeting, therefore, please now sing for us.”
In response, Milarepa sang a song,
--- PAGE 31 ---
The Ocean of Saṃsāra
Alas, is not saṃsāra like the sea?
Drawing as much water as one pleases,
It remains the same without abating.
Are not the Three Precious Ones like Mount
Sumeru,
That never can be shaken by anyone?
…
Are there Mongol bandits invading yogis’ cells?
Why, then, do great yogis stay in towns and
villages?
Are not people craving for rebirth and Bardo? [13]
Why, then, do they cling so much to their
disciples?
Are woollen clothes in the next life more
expensive?
Why, then, do women make so much of them
here?
Do people fear that saṃsāra may be emptied?
Why, then, do priests and laymen hanker after
children?
Are you reserving food and drink for your next
life?
--- PAGE 32 ---
Why, then, do men and women not give to charity?
Is there any misery in Heaven above?
Why, then, do so few plan to go there?
Is there any joy below in Hell?
Why, then, do so many prepare to visit there?
Do you not know that all sufferings
And Lower Realms are the result of sins?
Surely you know that if you now practise virtue,
When death comes you will have peace of mind
and no regrets.
(p. 539 extract)
Upon the arrival of autumn, Milarepa decided to leave
Upper Lowo where he had been preaching the Dharma
during the summer, and go to Di Se Snow Mountain. His
patrons gave him a farewell party, circling round him, and
made him offerings and obeisance. They said: “Be kind
enough to give us, your disciples, some instructions and
advice.” The Jetsun then emphasized the transiency of all
beings, admonishing them to practise Dharma earnestly.
And he sang…
--- PAGE 33 ---
The Song of Transience with Eight
Similes
Faithful disciples here assembled (ask yourselves):
”Have I practised Dharma with great earnestness?
Has the deepest faith arisen in my heart?”
He who wants to practise Dharma and gain
non-regressive faith,
Should listen to this exposition of the Mundane
Truths
And ponder well their meaning.
Listen to these parables and metaphors:
A painting in gold,
Flowers of turquoise blue,
Floods in the vale above,
Rice in the vale below,
Abundance of silk,
A jewel of value,
The crescent moon,
And a precious son—
These are the eight similes.
No one has sung before
Such casual words (on this),
--- PAGE 34 ---
No one can understand their meaning
If he heeds not the whole song.
The gold painting fades when it is completed—
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think, then you will practise Dharma.
The lovely flowers of turquoise blue
Are destroyed in time by frost—
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think!, then you will practise Dharma.
The flood sweeps strongly down the vale above,
Soon becoming weak and tame in the plain below
—
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think, then you will practise Dharma.
Rice grows in the vale below;
Soon with a sickle it is reaped
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think!, then you will practise Dharma.
Elegant silken cloth
Soon with a knife is cut—
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think!, then you will practise Dharma.
--- PAGE 35 ---
The precious jewel that you cherish
Soon will belong to others—
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think!, then you will practise Dharma.
The pale moonbeams soon will fade and vanish—
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think!, then you will practise Dharma.
A precious son is born;
Soon he is lost and gone—
This shows the illusory nature of all beings,
This proves the transient nature of all things.
Think!, then you will practise Dharma.
These are the eight similes I sing.
I hope you will remember and practise them.
Affairs and business will drag on forever,
So lay them down and practise now the Dharma.
If you think tomorrow is the time to practise,
Suddenly you find that life has slipped away.
Who can tell when death will come?
Ever think of this,
And devote yourselves to Dharma practice.
(pp. 203–205)
--- PAGE 36 ---
Travelling with his disciples, Milarepa came to Din Ri
Namar where he enquired for the name of the outstanding
patron. Learning that the physician Yang Nge was a
devoted Buddhist, he proceeded to his house, where the
physician said, “It is said that Jetsun Milarepa can use
anything at hand as a metaphor for preaching. Now please
use the bubbles of water in this ditch before us as a
metaphor and give us a discourse.” In response, Jetsun sang
a song…
--- PAGE 37 ---
The Fleeting Bubbles
I pay homage to my gracious Guru—
Pray make everyone here think of the Dharma!
As he said once, “Like bubbles is
This life, transient and fleeting—
In it no assurance can be found.”
A layman’s life is like a thief
Who sneaks into an empty house.
Know you not the folly of it?
Youth is like a summer flower—
Suddenly it fades away.
Old age is like a fire spreading
Through the fields—suddenly ’tis at your heels.
The Buddha once said, “Birth and death
Are like sunrise and sunset—
Now come, now go.”
Sickness is like a little bird
Wounded by a sling.
Know you not, health and strength
Will in time desert you?
Death is like an oil-dry lamp
--- PAGE 38 ---
(After its last flicker).
Nothing, I assure you,
In this world is permanent.
Evil Karma is like a waterfall,
Which I have never seen flow upward.
A sinful man is like a poisonous tree—
If you lean on it, you will injured be.
Transgressors are like frost-bitten peas—
Like spoiled fat, they ruin everything.
Dharma-practisers are like peasants in the field—
With caution and vigour they will be successful.
The Guru is like medicine and nectar—
Relying on him, one will win success.
Discipline is like a watchman’s tower—
Observing it, one will attain Accomplishment.
The Law of Karma is like saṃsāra’s wheel—
Whoever breaks it will suffer a great loss.
Saṃsāra is like a poisonous thorn
In the flesh—if not pulled out,
The poison will increase and spread.
The coming of death is like the shadow
Of a tree at sunset—
It runs fast and none can halt it.
When that time comes,
What else can help but Holy Dharma?
Though Dharma is the fount of victory.
--- PAGE 39 ---
Those who aspire to it are rare.
Scores of men are tangled in
The miseries of saṃsāra;
Into this misfortune born,
They strive by plunder and theft for gain.
He who talks on Dharma
With elation is inspired,
But when a task is set him,
He is wrecked and lost.
Dear patrons, do not talk too much,
But practise the Holy Dharma.
(pp. 632–633)
“This is indeed very helpful to my mind,” commented the
physician, “but please preach still further for me on the
truth of Karma and the suffering of birth, old age, illness
and death, thus enabling me to gain a deeper conviction in
Buddhadharma.” In response, the Jetsun sang:
Please listen to these words,
Dear friends here assembled.
When you are young and vigorous
--- PAGE 40 ---
You ne’er think of old age coming,
But it approaches slow and sure
Like a seed growing underground.
When you are strong and healthy
You ne’er think of sickness coming,
But it descends with sudden force
Like a stroke of lightning.
When involved in worldly things
You ne’er think of death’s approach
Quick it comes like thunder
Crashing ’round your head.
Sickness, old age and death
Ever meet each other
As do hands and mouth.
Waiting for his prey in ambush,
Yama [14] is ready for his victim,
When disaster catches him.
Sparrows fly in single file. Like them,
Life, Death and Bardo follow one another.
Never apart from you
Are these three ’visitors’.
Thus thinking, fear you not
Your sinful deeds?
Like strong arrows in ambush waiting,
Rebirth in Hell, as Hungry Ghost, or Beast
Is (the destiny) waiting to catch you.
If once into their traps you fall,
--- PAGE 41 ---
Hard will you find it to escape.
Do you not fear the miseries
You experienced in the past?
Surely you will feel much pain
If misfortunes attack you?
The woes of life succeed one another
Like the sea’s incessant waves
One has barely passed, before
The next one takes its place.
Until you are liberated, pain
and pleasure come and go at random
Like passers-by encountered in the street.
Pleasures are precarious,
Like bathing in the sun;
Transient, too, as snowstorms
Which come without warning.
Remembering these things,
Why not practise the Dharma?
(pp. 634–635)
Rechungpa, after returning from India, had
contracted the disease of pride and in various ways
Milarepa tried to cure him. As his disciple required
--- PAGE 42 ---
food, they went for alms but were abused by an old
woman who declared that she had no food. The next
morning they found her dead and Milarepa said:
“Rechungpa, like this woman, every sentient being is
destined to die, but seldom do people think of this
fact. So they lose many opportunities to practise the
Dharma. Both you and I should remember this
incident and learn a lesson from it.” Whereupon, he
sang…
--- PAGE 43 ---
The Song of Transiency and
Delusion
When the transience of life strikes deeply into
one’s heart
One’s thoughts and deeds will naturally accord
with Dharma.
If repeatedly and continuously one thinks about
death,
One can easily conquer the demons of laziness.
No one knows when death will descend upon him
—
Just as this woman last night!
Rechungpa, do not be harsh, and listen to your
Guru!
Behold, all manifestations in the outer world
Are ephemeral like a dream last night!
One feels utterly lost in sadness
When one thinks of this passing dream.
Rechungpa, have you completely wakened
From this great puzzlement?
Oh, the more I think of this,
The more I aspire to Buddha and the Dharma.
--- PAGE 44 ---
The pleasure-yearning human body is an
ungrateful creditor.
Whatever good you do to it,
It always plants the seeds of pain.
This human body is a bag of filth and dirt;
Never be proud of it, Rechungpa,
But listen to my song!
When I look back at my body,
I see it as a mirage-city;
Though I may sustain it for a while,
It is doomed to extinction.
When I think of this,
My heart is filled with grief!
Rechungpa, would you not cut off saṃsāra?
Oh, the more I think of this,
The more I think of Buddha and the Dharma!
A vicious person can never attain happiness.
Errant thoughts are the cause of all regrets,
Bad dispositions are the cause of all miseries,
Never be voracious, oh Rechungpa,
But listen to my song!
When I look back at my clinging mind,
It appears like a short-lived sparrow in the woods
—
Homeless, and with nowhere to sleep;
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief.
Rechungpa, will you let yourself indulge in ill-
--- PAGE 45 ---
will?
Oh, the more I think of this,
The more I aspire to Buddha and the Dharma!
Human life is as precarious
As a single slim hair of a horse’s tail
Hanging on the verge of breaking;
It may be snuffed out at anytime
Like this old woman was last night!
Do not cling to this life, Rechungpa,
But listen to my song!
When I observe inwardly my breathings
I see they are transient, like the fog;
They may vanish any moment into nought.
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief.
Rechungpa, do you not want to conquer
That insecurity now?
Oh, the more I think of this,
The more I aspire to Buddha and the Dharma.
To be close to wicked kinsmen only causes hatred.
The case of this old woman is a very good lesson.
Rechungpa, stop your wishful-thinking
And listen to my song!
When I look at friends and consorts
They appear as passers-by in the bazaar;
Meeting with them is only temporary,
But separation is forever!
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief.
--- PAGE 46 ---
Rechungpa, do you not want to cast aside
All worldly associations?
Oh, the more I think of this,
The more I think of Buddha and the Dharma.
A rich man seldom enjoys
The wealth that he has earned;
This is the mockery of Karma and saṃsāra,
Money and jewels gained through stinginess and
toil
Are like this old woman’s bag of food.
Do not be covetous, Rechungpa,
But listen to my song!
When I look at the fortunes of the rich,
They appear to me like honey to the bees—
Hard work, serving only for others’ enjoyment,
Is the fruit of their labour.
When I think of this, my heart is filled with grief.
Rechungpa, do you not want to open
The treasury within your mind?
Oh, the more I think of this,
The more I aspire to Buddha and His Teachings.
(pp. 433–435)
46

--- PAGE 47 ---
When Milarepa was sitting in meditation, a frightened deer
dashed by, followed by a ravening hound. By the power of
his loving-kindness and compassion (mettā-karuṇā),
Milarepa made them lie down, one on either side of him,
and then preached to them. Then came the fierce and proud
huntsman, Chirawa Gwunbo Dorje, who was enraged by
the sight of the Jetsun and shot an arrow at him, but missed.
Milarepa sang to him and his heart began to turn to the
Dharma. Then the hunter saw that Milarepa was living an
austere life and great faith arose in him. He wished then to
practise Dharma after talking with his family but the Jetsun
warned him that his present meritorious thought might
change and he sang:
Hearken, hearken, huntsman!
Though the thunder crashes,
It is but empty sound;
Though the rainbow is richly-coloured,
It will soon fade away.
The pleasures of this world are like dream-visions;
Though one enjoys them, they are the source of sin.
Though all we see may seem to be eternal,
It will soon fall to pieces and will disappear.
Yesterday perhaps one had enough or more,
All today is gone and nothing’s left;
Last year one was alive, this year one dies.
Good food turns into poison,
And the beloved companion turns into a foe.
--- PAGE 48 ---
Harsh words and complaints requite
Good-will and gratitude.
Your sins hurt no one but yourself.
Among one hundred heads, you value most your
own.
In all ten fingers, if one is cut, you feel the pain.
Among all things you value, yourself is valued
most.
The time has come for you to help yourself.
Life flees fast. Soon death
Will knock upon your door.
It is foolish, therefore, one’s devotion to postpone.
What else can loving kinsmen do
But throw one into saṃsāra?
To strive for happiness hereafter
Is more important than to seek it now.
The time has come for you to rely upon a Guru,
The time has come to practise Dharma.
(p. 284)
Milarepa: “If one is really determined to free oneself
from the sufferings of saṃsāra, such as birth, old age,
illness, death, and so on, he will have peace of mind
--- PAGE 49 ---
all the time and will not need to make any effort.
Otherwise, he should bear in mind that the sufferings
in a future life could be much more durable and
longer-lasting than those in this life, and the burden
could also be much heavier. It is, therefore, of
paramount importance to take steps to prepare for
the next life.” This was said to some young men from
his native country, who asked how they could
extricate themselves from worldly affairs. Then,
Milarepa said: “Please hearken, and I will sing a song
for you.”
We sentient beings moving in the world
Float down the flowing stream
Of the Four Sufferings. [15]
Compared to this, how much more formidable
Are the unceasing future lives in saṃsāra
Why not, then, prepare a boat for the “crossing”?
The state of our future lives is far more fearful
And deserving of far more concern
Than are the dreadful demons, ghosts and Yama,
So why not prepare for yourself a guide?
Even the dread passions—craving, hatred and
blindness—
Are not so fearful
As the state of our (unknown) future,
So why not prepare for yourself an antidote?
Great is the Kingdom of the Three Realms of
--- PAGE 50 ---
Saṃsāra,
But greater is the endless road of birth-and-death,
So why not prepare for yourself provisions?
It will be better if you practise Dharma
If you have no assurance in yourselves.
(pp. 114–115)
Milarepa said: “A human body, free and opportune,
is as precious as a jewel, and to have a chance to
practise the Dharma is likewise very rare. Also, to
find one serious Buddhist in a hundred is difficult!
Considering the difficulties of meeting the right
Gurus, and other necessary favourable conditions for
practising Buddhism, you should deem yourselves
very fortunate that you have now met all these
requirements. Do not, therefore, (waste them), but
practise the Dharma.”
(p. 116)
Shiwa Aui, a leading disciple of Milarepa, once asked his
Master, when the latter was nearing the end of his life:
“Please tell us what are the joys and miseries that sentient
beings experience in the Six Realms? Especially, please tell
us what are the pleasures devas enjoy?” The Jetsun replied:
--- PAGE 51 ---
Do not be fascinated by the pleasures of heavenly beings;
they also have miseries—like this:
The pleasures enjoyed by men and devas
Are like the amusements of the Heavenly Yak: [16]
It may low like thunder
But what good can it do?
(Swooning in a state of trance),
The devas in the four Formless Heavens [17]
Cannot distinguish good from evil.
Because their minds are dull and callous,
Insensible, they have no feeling.
In unconscious stupefaction,
They live many kalpas in a second.
What a pity that they know it not!
Alas, these heavenly births
Have neither sense nor value.
When they think vicious thoughts
They start to fall again.
As to the reason for their fall
(Scholars), with empty words,
Have dried their mouths in explanations.
In the Heavens of Form, [18]
The devas of the five higher and twelve lower
realms
Can only live until their merits are exhausted.
Their virtues are essentially conditional,
And their Karma basically Saṃsāric.
--- PAGE 52 ---
Those Dharma-practisers subject to worldly
desires,
And those ’great yogis’ wrapped in stillness,
Have yet to purify their minds;
Huge may be their claims and boasts,
But habitual thought-seeds
In their minds are deeply rooted.
After a long dormant time,
Evil thoughts again will rise.
When their merits and fortunes are consumed;
They to the Lower Realms [19] will go once more!
If I explain the horror of a deva’s death,
You will be disheartened and perplexed.
Bear this in your mind and ever meditate!
(p. 663)
In a sad mood the disciples then asked the Jetsun to preach
to them of the sufferings of the asuras. In response, he sang:
Great are asuras’ sufferings.
Misled by malignant thoughts,
To all they bring misfortunes
Knowing not their true Self-mind [20]
Their deeds are self-deceiving.
--- PAGE 53 ---
Their feelings coarse, their senses crude,
Deeming all to be their foes,
Not even for a moment
Can they know the truth.
Evil by nature, they can hardly bear a loss;
Harder is benevolence for them to cherish.
Blinded by the Karma-of-Belligerence,
Never can they take good counsel.
All nature such as this is caused
By seeking pleasures for oneself
And bearing harmful thoughts towards others.
Pride, favouritism, vanity and hatred
Are the evil Karmic forces
That drag one to a lower birth,
Making sinful deeds more easy.
Ripening Karma brings (to them)
An instinctive hatred;
Failing to distinguish right from wrong,
They can hardly be helped by any means.
Bear, oh my disciples, this in your minds
And meditate with perseverance all your lives!
(p. 664)
53

--- PAGE 54 ---
Shiwa Aui said, “Now please tell us about the sufferings of
human beings.” In answer, Milarepa sang:
We human beings are endowed with power
To do good, or evil deeds;
This is because our body (personality)
Is made of all Six Elements. [21]
You junior Repas who desire to be great scholars
Should know the ’Kernel and shell’ of Buddhism.
Lest learning lead you only to confusion.
Knowing not the root of mind,
Useless is it to meditate for years.
Without sincerity and willingness,
Rich offerings have no real meaning.
Without giving impartial aid to all,
Patronage of one’s favourite is wrong.
Knowing not the right counsel for each man,
Blunt talk will only bring trouble and discord.
He who knows the appropriate way
To help men of diverse dispositions,
Can use expedient words [22] for kind and fruitful
purposes.
He who knows but little of himself
Can harm many by his ignorance.
When good-will arises in one’s mind,
Stones, trees and earth all become seeds of virtue.
Again, an over-punctilious person
--- PAGE 55 ---
Knows not how to relax;
A gluttonous dog knows not what is hunger;
A brazen Guru knows not what is fear.
Rich men are wretched creatures with their money,
Poor men are wretched creatures without money.
Alas, with, or without money, both are miserable!
Happiness will come, dear children,
If you can practise the Dharma.
Remember then, my words, and practise with
perseverance.
(p.665)
“It is very true that human beings suffer like this,” agreed
the disciples. “Now please tell us about the sufferings in the
three miserable realms, even though just to mention them
may be distressing. Also, to spur our spiritual efforts, please
preach to us of the causes of Hell and its woe.” In response,
Jetsun sang:
Those who, for meat and blood
Slaughter living beings,
Will in the Eight Hot Hells be burned.
But if they can remember the Good Teachings,
Soon will they be emancipated.
--- PAGE 56 ---
Ruthless robbers who strike and kill,
Wrongly eating others’ food
While clinging to their own with greed,
Will fall into the Eight Cold Hells.
Yet if they do not hold wrong views against the
Dharma
It is said that their time for deliverance will come.
(The Holy Scriptures) also say
Whene’er the denizens of hell
Recall the name of Buddha,
Delivered will they be immediately.
Ever repeating sinful deeds means
Dominance by vice and evil Karma.
Fiends filled with the craving for pleasures,
Murder even their parents and Gurus,
Rob the Three Gems of their treasure,
Revile and accuse falsely the Precious Ones,
And condemn the Dharma as untrue;
In the Hell-of-unceasing-torment [23]
These evil doers will be burned;
Far from them alas, is Liberation.
This, my sons, will certainly distress you,
So into Dharma throw your hearts
And devote yourselves to meditation!
(p. 666)
--- PAGE 57 ---
“For the benefit of sentient beings, please tell us now about
the sufferings of the Hungry Ghosts.” In reply, Milarepa
sang:
Hungry Ghosts, seeing all forms as foes,
Run from each successive terror.
Wild beasts fight and eat each other.
Who of them is to blame?
The sufferings of the Hungry Ghosts
Grow from their stinginess.
Like a rat is he who fails
To give alms when he is rich,
Begrudges food when he has plenty,
Gives no food to others, but checks
Them over, counts and stores them—
Discontented day and night.
At the time of death he sees
That his hard-earned wealth
Will be enjoyed by others.
Caught in Bardo [24] by the agony of loss,
As a Hungry Ghost he lives his life.
Due to his delusive thoughts
He suffers thirst and hunger.
When he sees his goods enjoyed by others,
He is tormented by avarice and hate.
--- PAGE 58 ---
Again and again will he thus fall down (to Hell).
I, the great Yogi of Strength,
Now sing for you the woes
Of Hungry Ghosts. Dear sons
And disciples here assembled, think on
My words and meditate with perseverance!
(p. 667)
Shiwa Aui then requested, “Now please tell us of the
sufferings of animals.” Whereupon Milarepa sang:
Animals, alas, are ignorant and benighted;
Most stupid men will incarnate amongst them.
Blind and enslaved by evil Karma,
The ignorant know not Dharma’s Truth.
Blind both to evil and to virtue,
They quickly waste their lives away.
Unable to reason and use symbols,
They act like blind automations;
Unable to distinguish wrong from right,
Like maniacs, they do much wrong.
Some people even say ’tis good
(To be an animal);
Since it does neither regret nor repent,
--- PAGE 59 ---
Alas! How foolish is this thought!
Then, all stupid life-takers
Will incarnate as beasts;
The fools who know not right from wrong,
And those who harbour vicious thoughts,
Will incarnate as common brutes.
Hard it is for me to describe
Their Karmas, but think on my words
And cultivate your minds.
(pp. 667–668)
Milarepa once took Rechungpa to the market of Nya Non in
order to further his spirit of renunciation. Many butchers
had gathered there. The meat was piled up like walls,
animals’ heads were stacked in huge heaps, skins were
scattered over the ground, and blood ran together like water
in a pond. In addition, rows of livestock were fastened to
the stakes for slaughtering…. Whereupon with
overwhelming compassion, Milarepa sang:
How pitiful are sentient beings in saṃsāra!
Looking upward to the Path of Liberation,
How can one feel aught but sorrow for these sinful
men.
--- PAGE 60 ---
How foolish and sad it is to indulge in killing,
When by good luck and Karma one has a human
form.
How sad it is to do an act
That in the end will hurt oneself.
How sad it is to build a sinful wall
Of meat made of one’s dying parents’ flesh? [25]
How sad it is to see
Meat eaten and blood flowing.
How sad it is to know confusions
And delusions fill the minds of men
How sad it is to find but vice,
Not love, in peoples’ hearts.
How sad it is to see
That Blindness veils all men
Who cherish sinful deeds.
Craving causes misery,
While worldly deeds bring pain.
With this in mind one feels sorrowful,
Thinking thus, one searches for a cure.
When I think of those who never
Take heed for their future lives,
But indulge in evil deeds,
I feel most disturbed and sad,
And deeply fearful for them.
Rechungpa, seeing all these things,
Don’t you remember Holy Dharma?
Don’t you in saṃsāra lose all heart?
--- PAGE 61 ---
Rouse the spirit of renunciation,
Go, Rechungpa, to the cave to meditate!
Heed the bounty of your Guru
And avoid all sinful deeds,
Casting worldly things aside
Stay firm in your practice
Keep your good vows
And devote your life to meditation.
(pp. 566–567)
A very beautiful girl of about fifteen years of age, whose
name was Bardarbom said to Milarepa: “By merely meeting
you I shall have accumulated a great deal of merit” and
begged to be taken as his servant and disciple. Milarepa
replied, “if you seriously want to practise the Dhamma, you
must learn that worldly affairs are your enemies and
renounce them.” And he sang a song called…
--- PAGE 62 ---
The Four Renunciations
Listen, you fortunate girl,
You who have wealth and faith!
Future lives last longer than this life—
Do you know how to make provision?
Giving with niggardly heart
As if feeding a strange watch-dog,
Only brings more harm than good—
Bringing nothing in return but a vicious bite,
Renounce parsimony, now that you know its evil.
Listen, you fortunate girl!
We know less of this life than the next one.
Have you prepared and lit your lamp?
Should it not be ready,
Meditate on the “Great Light.”
If you choose to help an ungrateful foe,
You will gain not a friend, but damage.
Beware of acting blindly:
Beware of this evil and discard it.
Listen, you fortunate girl.
Future lives are worse than this life—
Have you a guide or escort for your journey?
--- PAGE 63 ---
If you have not the right companion,
Rely on the holy Dharma.
Beware of relatives and kinsmen;
They hinder and oppose (the Dharma).
They never help but only harm one.
Did you know that your kinsmen are your foes?
If this be true, surely you should leave them.
Listen, you fortunate girl.
The journey in the future life
is more hazardous than this one—
Have you prepared a fine horse of perseverance for
it?
If not, you should strive hard and work with
diligence.
The excitement of the start will soon diminish;
Beware the foe, “Inertness”, [26] which makes one
go astray.
Of no avail are hurry and excitement, which only
harm one.
Do you yet know that your enemies are laziness
and caprice?
If you understand my words,
you should cast them both away.
(pp. 145–146)
63

--- PAGE 64 ---
Going to Bardarbom’s house for alms, Milarepa
encountered “an ugly old woman with a handful of ashes.”
She rushed at him, shouting, “You miserable yogi-beggars! I
never see you in one place! In the summer you all show up
begging for milk and butter! In the winter you all come for
grain! I’ll wager you wanted to sneak in to steal my
daughter’s and daughter-in-law’s jewellery!” Grumbling
and trembling with rage, she was about to throw the ashes
at Milarepa, when he said, “Wait a minute, grandmother!
Please listen to me!” He then sang…
--- PAGE 65 ---
A Song with Nine Meanings
Above is the auspicious Heaven,
Below are the Three Paths of Misery,
In between, are those who are not free
to choose their birth. [27]
These three all converge on you.
Grandmother, you are an angry woman,
And dislike the Dharma!
Question your own thoughts and your mind
examine.
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
You need a qualified and dependable Guru,
Think carefully, dear lady;
When you were first sent here,
Did you dream that you would become an old
nanny-goat?
In the morning you get up from bed,
In the evening you go to sleep,
In between, you do the endless housework;
You are engrossed in these three things.
Grandmother, you are an unpaid maid.
Question your own thoughts and your mind
--- PAGE 66 ---
examine.
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
You need a qualified and dependable Guru,
And then things may be different for you.
The head of the family is the most important one,
Income and earnings are the next most longed-for
things,
Then sons and nephews are wanted most.
By these three you are bound
Grandmother, for yourself you have no share.
Question your own thoughts and your mind
examine.
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
You need a qualified and dependable Guru,
And then things may be different for you.
Attaining what you want even though you steal,
Getting what you desire even though you rob,
Fighting your foe without regard to death and
wounds,
To these three things you are subjected.
Grandmother, you are burned up with fury
When you come upon your foe.
Question your own thoughts and your mind
examine.
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
You need a qualified and dependable Guru,
And then things may be different for you.
--- PAGE 67 ---
Gossip about other women and their manners
Is what interests you;
To the affairs of your own son and nephew
You pay attention,
To talk of widows and relatives is your delight.
These three things enchant you.
Grandmother, are you so gentle when you gossip?
Question your own thoughts and your mind
examine.
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
You need a qualified and dependable Guru,
And then things may be different for you.
To lift you from a chair is like pulling out a peg;
With feeble legs you waddle like a thieving goose;
Earth and stone seem to shatter when you drop
into a seat;
Senile and clumsy is your body,
Grandmother, you have no choice but to obey.
Question your own thoughts and your mind
examine.
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
What you require is a qualified and dependable
Guru,
And from that you may find out how you have
changed.
Your skin is creased with wrinkles;
Your bones stand out sharply from your shrunken
flesh,
--- PAGE 68 ---
You are deaf, dumb, imbecile, eccentric and
tottering;
You are thrice deformed.
Grandmother, your ugly face is wrapped in
wrinkles.
Question your own thoughts and your mind
examine.
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
You need a qualified and dependable Guru,
And then things may be different for you.
Your food and drink are cold and foul;
Your coat is heavy and in rags;
Your bed so rough it tears the skin;
These three are your constant companions.
Grandmother, you are now a wretch,
half woman and half bitch!
Question your own thoughts and your mind
examine!
You should practise the Buddha’s Teaching,
What you need is a qualified and dependable
Guru,
And then things may be different for you.
To attain higher birth and Liberation
Is harder than to see a star in daytime;
To fall into saṃsāra’s wretched path
Is easy and often happens.
Now, with fear and grief at heart,
You watch the time of death draw nigh.
--- PAGE 69 ---
Grandmother, can you face death with confidence?
Question your own mind and your thoughts
examine!
What you need is to practise the Teaching of the
Buddha,
What you need is a qualified and dependable
Guru.
(pp. 136–139)
Milarepa said to his faithful patroness, Shindormo,
“My dear patroness, except for advanced Dharma
practitioners, the pains of birth, decay, illness and
death descend upon everyone. It is good to think
about and fear them, because this enables one to
practise the Dharma when death is approaching.”
Whereupon he sang:
In the river of birth, decay, illness,
And death we worldly beings are submerged;
Who can escape these pains on earth?
We drift on with the tide.
Amidst waves of misery and darkness
We flow on and on.
Seldom in saṃsāra can one find joy.
--- PAGE 70 ---
More miseries come by trying to avoid them;
Through pursuing pleasures one’s sins increase.
To be free from pain,
Wrong deeds should be shunned.
When death draws near, the wise
Always practise Dharma.
(p. 552)
“I do not know how to observe the suffering of birth,” said
Shindormo, “Please instruct me how to meditate upon it.”
In answer, the Jetsun sang:
My faithful patroness, I will
Explain the suffering of birth.
The wanderer in the Bardo plane
Is the Ālaya Consciousness [28]
Driven by lust and hatred
It enters a mother’s womb.
Wherein it feels like a fish
In a rock’s crevice caught,
Sleeping in blood and yellow fluid,
It is pillowed in discharges,
Crammed in filth, it suffers pain.
--- PAGE 71 ---
A bad body from a bad Karma is born.
Though remembering past lives,
It cannot say a single word.
Now scorched by heat,
Now frozen by the cold,
In nine months it emerges
From the womb in pain excruciating,
As if pulled out gripped by pliers.
When from the womb its head is squeezed,
The pain is like being thrown into a bramble pit.
The tiny body on the mother’s lap,
Feels like a sparrow grappled by a hawk.
When from the baby’s tender body
The blood and filth are being cleansed,
The pain is like being flayed alive.
When the umbilical cord is cut,
It feels as though the spine was severed.
When wrapped in the cradle it feels bound
By chains, imprisoned in a dungeon.
He who realizes not the Truth of No-arising [29]
Never can escape from the dread pangs of birth.
There is no time to postpone devotion:
When one dies one’s greatest need
is the divine Dharma.
You should then exert yourself
To practise Buddha’s Teaching.
(pp. 553–554)
--- PAGE 72 ---
Shindormo asked again, “Please preach for us the sufferings
of old age.” In response, the Jetsun sang:
Listen, my good patrons, listen
To the sufferings of old age.
Painful is it to see one’s body
Becoming frail and quite worn out.
Who can help but feel dismayed
At the threat of growing old?
When old age descends upon one,
One’s straight body becomes bent;
When one tries to step firmly,
One staggers against one’s will;
One’s black hairs turn white.
One’s clear eyes grow dim;
One’s head shakes with dizziness,
And one’s keen ears turn deaf,
One’s ruddy cheeks grow pale,
And one’s blood dries up.
One’s nose—the pillar of one’s face—sinks in;
One’s teeth—the essence of one’s bones—protrude.
Losing control of tongue, one stammers.
On the approach of death,
one’s anguish and debts grow.
--- PAGE 73 ---
One gathers food and friends,
But one cannot keep them,
Trying not to suffer,
One only suffers more,
When one tells the truth to people,
Seldom is one believed;
The sons and nephews one has raised
And cherished, often become one’s foes.
One gives away one’s savings,
But wins no gratitude.
Unless you realize the truth of Non-decay, [30]
You will suffer misery in old age.
He who when old neglects the Dharma,
Should know that he is bound by Karma.
It is good to practise
The divine Dharma while you can still breathe.
(pp. 554–555)
Shindormo then said, “What you have just told us is very
true; I have experienced these things myself. Now please
preach for us the sufferings of sickness.” In reply, Milarepa
sang:
Dear patrons, you who know grief and sorrow,
--- PAGE 74 ---
Listen to the miseries of sickness.
This frail body is subject e’er to sickness,
So that one suffers excruciating pain.
The illnesses of Prāna (mind), gall and phlegm [31]
Constantly invade this frail human body,
Causing its blood and matter to be heated;
The organs are thus gripped by pain.
In a safe and easy bed
The sick man feels no comfort,
But turns and tosses, groaning in lament.
Through the Karma of (past) meanness,
Though with best of food you feed him,
He vomits all that he can take.
When you lay him in the cool,
He still feels hot and burning;
When you wrap him in warm cloth,
He feels cold as though soaked in sleet.
Though friends and kinsmen gather round,
None can relieve or share his pains
Though warlocks and physicians are proficient,
They cannot help cases caused by Ripening Karma.
He who has not realized the truth of No-illness [32]
Much suffering must undergo.
Since we know not when sickness will strike,
It is wise to practise Holy Dharma—
The sure conqueror of illness!
(p. 555)
--- PAGE 75 ---
“I hope to practise (more) Dharma when death draws near,”
said Shindormo. “Now please preach for me the suffering of
death. “ In answer, Milarepa sang:
Listen, my disheartened patroness:
Like the pain of repaying compound debts,
One must undergo the suffering of death,
Yama’s guards catch and carry one
When the time of death arrives.
The rich man cannot buy it off with money,
With his sword the hero cannot conquer it,
Nor can the clever woman outwit it by a trick.
Even the learned scholar cannot
Postpone it with his eloquence.
Here, the unlucky cannot make appeal,
Nor can a brave man here display his valour.
When all the Nadis [33] converge in the body,
One is crushed as if between two mountains—
All vision and sensation become dim.
When Bon [34] priests and diviners become useless,
The trusted physician yields to his despair.
None can communicate with the dying man,
Protecting guards and devas vanish into nought.
Though the breath has not completely stopped,
One can all but smell the stale odour of dead flesh.
--- PAGE 76 ---
Like a lump of coal in chilly ashes
One approaches to the brink of death.
When dying, some still count the dates and stars;
Others cry and shout and groan;
Some think of worldly goods;
Some, that their hard-earned wealth
Will be enjoyed by others.
However deep one’s love, or great one’s sympathy,
He can but depart and journey on alone.
His good friend and consort
Can only leave him there;
In a bundle his beloved body
Will be folded [35] and carried off,
Then thrown in water, burned in fire,
Or simply cast off in a desolate land.
Faithful patrons, what in the end can we retain?
Must we sit idly by and let all things go?
When your breath stops tomorrow
No wealth on earth can help you.
Why, then, should one be mean?
Kind kinsmen circle round
The bed of the dying,i
But none can help him for a moment.
Knowing that all must be left behind,
One realizes that all great love
And attachment must be futile
When that final moment comes,
--- PAGE 77 ---
Only Holy Dharma helps.
You should strive, dear patroness,
For a readiness to die!
Be certain and ready and when the time comes,
You will have no fear and no regret.
(pp. 556–557)
A married couple of the village Mang Yul, had no children
and invited Milarepa to their house when he came that way
for alms. They sought to adopt him into their family and
said: “We have a good strip of land which we can give you;
you can then marry an attractive woman, and soon you will
have relatives.” Milarepa replied, “I have no need of these
things and I will tell you why:”
Home and land at first seem pleasant;
But they are like a rasp filing away
one’s body, word and mind!
How toilsome ploughing and digging can become!
And when the seeds you planted never sprout,
You have worked for nought!
In the end it becomes a land of misery—
Desolate and unprotected—
A place for hungry spirits, and of haunting ghosts!
--- PAGE 78 ---
When I think of the warehouse
For storing sinful deeds,
It gnaws at my heart,
In such a prison of transiency I will not stay,
I have no wish to join your family!
(pp. 119–120)
At first, when a man greets his relatives,
He is happy and joyful; with enthusiasm
He serves, entertains and talks to them.
Later, they share his meat and wine.
He offers something to them once, they may
reciprocate.
In the end, they cause anger, craving and
bitterness;
They are a fountain of regret and unhappiness.
With this in mind, l renounce pleasant and sociable
friends;
For kinsmen and neighbours, I have no appetite.
(pp. 121–122)
--- PAGE 79 ---
Wealth, at first, leads to self-enjoyment,
Making other people envious.
However much one has, one never feels it is
enough,
Until one is bound by the miser’s demon;
Hard it is then to spend it on virtuous deeds.
Wealth provokes enemies and stirs up ghosts.
One works hard to gather riches which others will
spend;
In the end, one struggles for life and death,
To amass wealth and money invites enemies;
So I renounce the delusions of saṃsāra.
To become the victim of deceitful devils,
I have no appetite.
(p. 122)
The Jetsun was about to leave Nya Non for other
hermitages, but the patrons of that place besought him to
stay with the utmost earnestness. The Jetsun replied: “If I do
--- PAGE 80 ---
not die, I shall try to come back to your village. If for some
time we cannot see each other, try at times to remember and
practise these things.” Whereupon he sang:
Alas, how pitiful are worldly things!
Like precious jade they cherish
Their bodies, yet like ancient trees
They are doomed in the end to fall.
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts
And pay heed to the Dharma.
Though you gather wealth
As hard as bees collect their honey,
The ills that upon you may fall
Can never be foretold,
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts
And pay heed to the Dharma.
One may offer to a Lama [36]
Loads of silk for many years;
But when an ill-fortune descends,
Like a fading rainbow
One’s faith at once dissolves.
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts
And pay heed to the Dharma.
Like a pair of mated beasts,
Lovers live together,
But calamity by the wolf’s attack
May fall on you at any time.
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts
--- PAGE 81 ---
And pay heed to the Dharma.
You may cherish your dear son,
Like a hen hatching her egg;
But a falling rock may crush it at any time.
Sometimes bridle your wild thoughts
And pay heed to the Dharma.
A face may be as pretty as a flower,
Yet at any time it can be spoiled by violent hail.
Think at times of how this world
Is sorry, transient and futile.
Though son and mother have affection
For each other, when discords arise,
Like foes they clash and quarrel,
Sometimes towards all sentient beings
You should feel compassion.
Basking in the warm sunlight
May be pleasant and a comfort,
But a storm of woe may rise
And choke you at any time,
Remember sometimes the deprived,
And give alms to those in need.
Oh, dear men and women patrons,
For him who cannot practise Dharma,
All his life will be meaningless,
All his acts wrong-doings!
(pp. 627–628)
--- PAGE 82 ---
“When the Jetsun Milarepa was staying in the Stone House
of Drin, Tsese, Ku Ju, and many other patrons came to him
for the Dharma. Tsese said, “Please give us some Buddhist
Teaching that is easy for us to understand.” Milarepa
replied, “Very well, lend your ears and listen carefully to
this song.”
Dear patrons, with care listen
For a moment to my words.
Superior men have need of Dharma;
Without it, they are like eagles—
Even though perched on high,
They have but little meaning.
Average men have need of Dharma;
Without it, they are like tigers—
Though possessing greatest strength,
They are of little value.
Inferior men have need of Dharma;
Without it, they are like a peddler’s asses—
Though they carry a big load,
It does them but little good.
Superior women need the Dharma;
Without it, they are like pictures on a wall—
Though they look very pretty,
--- PAGE 83 ---
They have no use or meaning.
Average women need the Dharma;
Without it they are like little rats—
Though they are clever at getting food,
Their lives have but little meaning.
Inferior women need the Dharma;
Without it, they are just like vixens—
Though they be deft and cunning,
Their deeds have little value.
Old men need the Dharma;
Without it, they are like decaying trees.
Growing youths the Dharma need;
Without it, they are like yoked bulls.
Young maidens need the Dharma,
Without it, they are but decorated cows.
All young people need the Dharma;
Without it, they are as blossoms
Shut within a shell.
All children need the Dharma;
Without it, they are as robbers possessed by
demons.
Without the Dharma, all one does
Lacks meaning and purpose.
Those who want to live with meaning
Should practise the Buddha’s Teaching.
--- PAGE 84 ---
(pp. 653–654)
The King of Ye Rang and Ko Kom (in Nepal) had heard of
Milarepa and sent his envoy to invite the Jetsun to Nepal.
As he declined to go the envoy expostulated that his Lord
had got nothing except the envoy’s empty hands and thornpricked feet. To this the Jetsun replied, “I am the great
Universal Emperor. There is no other emperor who is
happier, richer or more powerful than I.” The envoy
retorted, “If you claim that you are the great Universal
Emperor himself, then you must have Seven Precious
Articles of Royalty. [37] Please show me one of them.” The
Jetsun replied, “If you worldly kings and officers will follow
my Royal Way, each of you may also become the Supreme
Emperor, and thus be rich and noble.” Whereupon he sang:
If you kings and courtiers who seek pleasures,
Follow the Royal Succession of Milarepa,
Eventually you will obtain them.
This is the Royal Succession of Milarepa:
My faith is the Royal Precious Wheel
Revolving ’round the virtues day and night.
My wisdom is the Royal Precious Gem
Fulfilling all the wishes of myself and others.
--- PAGE 85 ---
The discipline’s observance
is my Royal Precious Queen;
She is my adornment, one most beautiful.
Meditation is my Royal Precious Minister;
With him I accumulate the Two Provisions. [38]
Self-inspection is my Royal Precious Elephant,
Which takes responsibility for Buddhist Dharma.
Diligence is my Royal Precious Horse,
Which bears the Klesas to Non-ego Land.
Study and contemplation is my Royal Precious
General
Who destroys the enemy of vicious thoughts.
If you have these Royal Precious Trappings,
You will gain a king’s fame and prosperity,
And conquer all your foes.
You may then spread the Ten Virtues [39] in your
dominion,
And urge all mother-like [40] sentient beings
To follow my noble teachings.
(p. 290)
At Gung Tang Castle, some men were building a house and
Milarepa approached them for alms. Saying that they had
--- PAGE 86 ---
no time and were busy while he appeared to be idle, they
invited him to join in their house construction. But Milarepa
declined to work upon worldly building, for he said his
house was already constructed in his own way. The men
asked him, “How did you build your house, and why do
you spurn our work so strongly?” Milarepa sang in reply:
Faith is the firm foundation of my house,
Diligence forms the high walls,
Meditation makes the huge bricks,
And Wisdom is the great corner-stone.
With these four things I build my castle,
And it will last as long as the Truth eternal!
Your worldly houses are delusions,
Mere prisons for the demons,
And so I would abandon and desert them.
(p. 106)
Some demons had come to afflict Milarepa, but after he had
sung two songs to them they began to turn towards the
Dharma. They said: “We are most grateful for your
preaching on the truth of Karma. In all frankness, we are of
limited intelligence and limitless ignorance. Our minds are
steeped in a morass of stubborn habitual thoughts. Pray,
--- PAGE 87 ---
therefore, teach us a lesson profound in meaning, great in
profit, and simple in comprehension and observation.”
Milarepa then sang…
--- PAGE 88 ---
The Song of the Seven Truths
However beautiful a song’s words may be,
It is but a tune to those
Who grasp not the words of Truth.
If a parable agrees not with the Buddha’s Teaching,
However eloquent it may sound,
’Tis but a booming echo.
If one does not practise Dharma,
However learned in the Doctrines one may claim
to be,
One is only self-deceived.
Living in solitude is self-imprisonment,
If one practises not the instruction
of the Oral Transmission. [41]
Labour on the farm is but self-punishment,
If one neglects the teaching of the Buddha.
For those who do not guard their morals,
Prayers are but wishful thinking.
For those who do not practise what they preach,
Oratory is but faithless lying.
Wrong-doing shunned, sins of themselves
--- PAGE 89 ---
diminish;
Good deeds done and merit will be gained.
Remain in solitude, and meditate alone,
Much talking is of no avail,
Follow what I sing, and practise Dharma!
(pp. 16–17)
The people of Nya Non, hearing that Milarepa had decided
to go, brought him good offerings and besought him to stay.
However, Milarepa replied, “I am going to another place to
await the coming of my death. If I do not die soon, there
will always be a chance for us to meet again. In the
meantime, you should all try to practise these things”, and
he sang to them of the Six Pāramitā [42] and their
applications:
Obeisance to my perfect Guru!
Property and possessions
Are like dew on the grass—
Give them away without avarice.
A human body that can practise Dharma
is most precious—
(To attain it again), you should keep the precepts
--- PAGE 90 ---
well
As if protecting your own eyes!
Anger brings one to the Lower Realms,
So, never lose your temper,
Even though your life be forfeit.
Inertia and slackness
Never bring accomplishment—
Exert yourself therefore in devotion.
Through distractions Mahāyāna [43]
Can never be understood
Practise therefore concentration.
Since Buddhahood cannot be won without,
Watch the nature of your mind within.
Like fog is faith unstable
When it starts to fade, you should
Strengthen it more than ever.
(pp. 626–627)
Milarepa cautioned his disciple Rechungpa to live as he had
lived, saying, “You also should renounce all Eight Worldly
Desires (or Winds) [44] and meditate hard while you still
--- PAGE 91 ---
have the chance. Now hearken to my song.”
Remember how your Guru lived
And bear in mind his honeyed words.
He who wastes a chance for Dharma,
Will never have another.
Bear, then, in mind the Buddha’s Teaching
And practise it with perseverance,
By clinging to things of this life,
In the next, one suffers more.
If you crave for pleasures
Your troubles but increase.
One is indeed most foolish
To miss a chance for Dharma.
Practise hard in fear of death!
Committing sins will draw
You to the Lower Realms.
By pretending and deceiving,
You cheat and mislead yourself.
Merits diminish
With the growth of evil thoughts.
If you are concerned with future life,
Diligently practise your devotions
A yogi longing for good clothes
Will soon lose his mind;
A yogi yearning for good food
Will soon do bad deeds;
A yogi loving pleasant words
--- PAGE 92 ---
Will not gain, but lose.
Renounce worldly pursuits, Rechungpa,
Devote yourself to meditation.
If you try to get a patron
Who is rich, you will meet a foe.
He who likes to be surrounded
By crowds, will soon be disappointed
He who hoards much wealth and money,
Soon is filled with vicious thoughts.
Meditate, my son Rechungpa,
And put your mind into the Dharma.
Realization will be won
At last by him who practises;
He who cannot practise
But only talks and brags,
Is always telling lies.
Alas, how hard it is to find
The chance and time to practise long
Rechungpa, try to meditate without diversions.
If you merge your mind with Dharma,
You will e’er be gay and joyful;
You will always find it better
If oft you dwell in solitude.
Son Rechungpa, may the precious
Illuminating-Void samādhi
Remain forever in your mind!
(pp. 564–566)
--- PAGE 93 ---
Rechungpa had a wish to visit Central Tibet (Weu) but
Milarepa tried to dissuade him from going by saying that it
was not yet the right time for him to leave his Guru. But
Rechungpa still kept pressing his request. Whereupon the
Jetsun sang:
It is good for you, the white lion on the mountain,
To stay high, and never go deep into the valley,
Lest your beautiful mane be sullied!
To keep it in good order,
You should remain on the high snow mountain.
Rechungpa, hearken to my words today!
It is good for you, the great eagle, on high rocks
To perch, and never fall into a pit,
Lest your mighty wings be damaged!
To keep them in good order,
You should remain in the high hills.
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru’s words!
It is good for you, the jungle tiger,
To stay in the deep forest: if you rove
About the plain, you will lose your dignity!
To keep your splendour in perfection,
In the forest you should remain.
--- PAGE 94 ---
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru’s words!
It is good for you, the golden-eyed fish,
To swim in the central sea;
If you swim too close to the shore,
You will in a net be caught.
You should remain in the deep waters.
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru’s words!
It is good for you, Rechungdordra of Gung Tang,
For you to stay in hermitages;
If you wander in different places,
Your experience and realization will dim.
To protect and cultivate devotion
You should remain in the mountains.
Rechungpa, hearken to your Guru’s words!
(p. 587)
Drashi Tse, a patron, once asked Milarepa: “Do you think I
should concentrate my effort on meditation alone or not?”
The Jetsun replied, “It is for the very sake of practice that
the Dharma is preached and studied. If one does not
practise or meditate, both studying and preaching will be
meaningless.”
--- PAGE 95 ---
Hearken, my faithful patrons!
Even sinful persons,
Not knowing the great power of Karma,
Dream of achieving Liberation,
Life wears out as days and years go by,
Yet in pursuing pleasures
People spend their lives.
They ask, will this month or year be good?”
Blind to life’s speedy passing,
Fools cherish foolish questions.
He who truly wants to practise Dharma
Should make offerings to the Holy Ones,
Take Refuge in the Triple Gem,
Give service to the Jetsun Guru,
Pay respect to his parents,
Give alms without hoping for reward.
He should offer help to those in need,
He should live and act up to The Dharma’s
principles.
Not much is needed for Buddhist practice;
Too many vows lead to self-cheating.
Dear patrons, try to practise what I say.
(pp. 650–651)
Milarepa said: “Many people think that they will
have ample time to practise the Dharma, but without
their notice or expectation, death suddenly descends
upon them and they lose forever the chance to
practise. What then can they do? One should turn all
--- PAGE 96 ---
one’s Buddhist knowledge inside one’s mouth, and
then meditate. If one does not further one’s studies
and meditation at the same time, but thinks that one
should first learn a great deal before starting the
actual practice (one will be completely lost) because
knowledge is infinite, and there is no possibility of
mastering it all.”
(p. 650)
Some patrons had made copious offerings to the young and
handsome Rechungpa before his departure for Weu but had
offered his old Teacher, the Jetsun, only third-rate
provisions. Milarepa came to know of this and shamed
them to their faces, whereupon they felt guilt and deep
regret. One day they came again and brought excessive
offerings saying, “Please sing for us to awaken our insight
into the transiency of beings.” Milarepa would not accept
their offerings but he sang this for them:
Hearken you mean patrons!
For the sake of fame, to do
Meritorious deeds—
For this life’s sake to seek
The protection of Buddha—
--- PAGE 97 ---
To give alms for the sake
Of returns and dividends—
To serve and offer for the sake
Of vanity and pride—
These four ways will never requite one!
For the sake of gluttony
To hold a sacramental feast [45] —
For the sake of egotism
To strive for Sutra-learning—
For distraction and amusement
To indulge in foolish talk and song—
For vain glory’s sake
To give the Initiations [46] —
These four ways will never bring one blessings!
If for love of preaching one expounds
Without the backing of scripture,
If through self-conceit,
One accepts obeisance;
If like a bungling, fumbling fool one teaches,
Not knowing the disciple’s capacity,
If to gather money one behaves
Like a Dharma practiser—
These four ways can never help the welfare of
sentient beings!
To prefer diversions to solitude,
To love pleasures and hate hardship,
To crave for talk when urged to meditate,
--- PAGE 98 ---
To wallow arrogantly in the world—
These four ways will never bring one to Liberation!
This is the song of Fourfold Warning
Dear patrons, bear it in your minds!
(pp. 601–602)
Rechungpa had just returned from India complete with new
learning, instructions in various meditations, skill in logic,
and a swollen head. In order to clear up Rechungpa’s pride
and arrogance, Milarepa sang:
… Oh, my son, your pride in what you learned
Will lead you well astray!
To preach a lot, with empty words,
Ruins your good experience and meditation.
To be swollen with pride and arrogance
Proves you have betrayed the Guru’s precepts.
Nothing gives cause for more regret
Than disobedience to the Guru.
No one is more distracted and confused
Than he who ceases to meditate in solitude.
Nothing is more fruitless
Than a Buddhist [47] who renounces not his kin.
--- PAGE 99 ---
Nothing is more shameful
Than a learned Buddhist who neglects his
meditation.
Nothing is more disgraceful
Than a monk who violates the rules.
(p. 425 extract)
More advice sung by Milarepa to try to cure Rechungpa’s
pride:
It is fine that father and son are in harmony—
Maintaining harmony with people is a great merit;
But the best merit is to keep in harmony
with one’s father.
If one is discordant with all the people he knows
He must be a person ominous or obnoxious.
Yet even more ominous is discord between father
and son.
Good it is to maintain harmony with one’s
father by right deeds,
Good it is to repay one’s mother’s kindness and
bounties,
Good it is to act in concord with all.
--- PAGE 100 ---
One’s wish can be fulfilled
If one is on good terms with one’s brothers,
To please one’s Guru
Is to gain his blessings;
To be humble is to succeed
A good Buddhist is one who conquers all bad
dispositions.
Kindness, is toleration of slanders;
To be modest is to gain fame and popularity;
To maintain pure discipline
Is to do away with pretence and concealment;
To live with a sage is to gain improvement;
To be indifferent is to stop all gossip;
To be good and compassionate is to advance
one’s Bodhi-mind.
These are things that a wise man should do,
But a fool can never distinguish friend from foe.
(pp. 426–427 extract)
Another exhortation to Rechungpa not to go as yet to Weu:
Listen, Rechung Dorjedrapa,
The well-learned Buddhist scholar.
--- PAGE 101 ---
Listen, and think with care on what I say.
Before faith and yearning arise for Dharma,
Beg not alms for mere enjoyment.
Before you have realized primordial Truth,
Boast not of your sublime philosophy.
Before you have fully mastered the Awareness
within,
Engage not in blind and foolish acts.
Before you can feed on the Instructions,
Involve yourself not in wicked occultism. [48]
Before you can explain the profound Teaching,
Be not beguiled by partial knowledge.
Before you can increase your merits,
Dispute not over others’ goods.
Before you can destroy your inner cravings,
Treat not charity as if it were your right.
Before you can stop projecting habitual thoughts,
Guess not when you make predictions.
Before you have gained Supreme Enlightenment,
Assume not that you are a venerable Lama.
Before you can master all virtues and practices,
Consider not leaving your Guru.
Son Rechungpa, it is better not to go, but stay!
(pp. 588–589)
101

--- PAGE 102 ---
A yogi of Gu Tang, who had great faith in the Jetsun,
requested meditation instructions. After these had been
given he said: “To help ignorant men like us, pray now,
instruct us in the practice of the Six Pāramitās.” [49] Milarepa
sang in reply:
Property and wealth are like dew on grass;
Knowing this, gladly should one give them away.
(charity)
It is most precious to be born a leisured and
worthy human being,
Knowing this, one should with care observe the
precepts
As if protecting one’s own eyes. (moral discipline)
Anger is the cause of falling to the Realms Below;
Knowing this, one should refrain from wrath,
Even at the risk of life. (patience)
Benefit to oneself and to others
Can never be achieved through sloth;
Strive, therefore, to do good deeds. (diligence)
A perturbed, wandering mind
Never sees the truth of Mahāyāna; [50]
Practise, therefore, concentration. (meditation)
The Buddha cannot be found through searching;
So contemplate your own mind. (wisdom)
Until the autumn mists dissolve into the sky,
Strive on with faith and determination.
--- PAGE 103 ---
(p. 100)
Two scholar-bhikkhus came to argue about the Dharma
with Milarepa but the discussion (which was a
demonstration of his mastery of meditation) turned against
them. Upon which, one of them asked for his instruction in
the Six Pāramitās. In answer, Milarepa sang:
If from parsimony one cannot free oneself,
What is the use of discussing charity? (dāna)
If one does not forswear hypocrisy and pretence,
What is the use of keeping discipline? (sīla)
If one abjures not malicious revilings,
What is the use of exercising
pretentious “patience”? (khanti)
If one abandons not indifference and inertness,
What is the use of swearing to be Moral? (viriya)
If one conquers not the errant thoughts within,
What is the use of toiling in meditation? (samādhi)
If one does not see all forms as helpful,
What is the use of practising the Wisdom (paññā)
If one knows not the profound teaching
Of forbidding and allowing,
What is the use of learning?
--- PAGE 104 ---
If one knows not the art of taking and rejecting,
What is the use of speaking on Karma-causation?
If one’s mind does not accord with the Dharma,
What is the use of joining the Order?
If the poisonous snake of Klesa [51] is not killed,
The yearning for wisdom only leads to fallacy.
If venomous jealousy is not overcome,
One’s yearning for the Bodhi-mind will be an
illusion.
If one refrains not from hurting people,
One’s longing for respect and honour
Is merely wishful thinking.
If one cannot conquer ego-clinging and prejudice,
One’s craving for the Equality of Dharma [52]
Only brings wrong views.
If one cannot subdue the demon, clinging-ego,
One’s Klesas will be great and his Yoga bound to
fail.
If one’s actions conform not with the Dharma.
One will always hinder the good deeds of others.
If one has not yet absorbed one’s mind in Dharma,
One’s babbling and prattling will only disturb
others’ minds.
Therefore, do not waste your life in words and
chatter
But try to gain the assurance of no-regret
And the confidence of facing death!
(pp. 387–388)
--- PAGE 105 ---
Milarepa said: “Dear teachers, the proverb says:
’Judging from the complexion of his face, one knows
whether a man has eaten or not’. In the same light,
the fact that one knows or knows not the Dharma,
can easily be detected by whether or not one can
conquer one’s own ego-clinging desires. If he can,
that proves that one knows and practises the
Buddhist Teachings. One may be very eloquent
talking about the Dharma and win all the debates,
but if one cannot subdue even a fraction of one’s egoclinging and desires, but merely indulges oneself in
words and talk, one’s victories in debate will never
bring one any profit but will only increase one’s
egotism and pride.”
(p. 384)
One of the scholar-bhikkhus who had previously been
Opposed to the Jetsun, gradually acquired faith in him and
eventually came to him for the Dharma, requesting, “Now
please be kind enough to instruct me in the essence of the
Six Pāramitās.” In response, the Jetsun sang:
I am not well-versed in words
Being no scholar-preacher,
--- PAGE 106 ---
Yet this petitioner is sincere and good.
The Six Pāramitās [53] contain all Buddhist
teachings.
To those who practise Dharma,
Wealth is but a cause of diversion.
He who gives his (wealth) all away,
Will be born a Prince of Heaven.
Noble is it to practise charity!
Moral discipline is a ladder to Liberation
Which neither monks nor laymen can discard
All Buddhist followers should practise it!
Buddhist patience, by the Patience-preacher [54]
exemplified,
Is the virtue which the Buddha cherished most.
It is a garment difficult to wear,
Yet all merits grow when it is worn.
Diligence is the short path to Freedom
And a necessity for Dharma-practice.
Without it nothing can be done.
Ride then upon the horse of diligence!
These four Dharmas bring merit to men,
Being indispensable for all.
Now I will speak of Wisdom.
Meditation is a teaching between these two,
As it applies both to Wisdom and Merit practice,
By it all distractions are overcome,
--- PAGE 107 ---
For all Buddhist practice, it is most important.
Wisdom-Pāramitā is the teaching of Final Truth,
The dearest treasure of all Buddhas.
Enjoy it then without exhaustion,
It is the Wish-fulfilling Gem of Heaven,
Fulfilling the hopes of all sentient beings.
To those who can renounce activities,
Wisdom-Pāramitā will bring final rest.
This provision of Wisdom is most precious;
Whereby one will reach perfection step by step.
This is my reply, Venerable Monk,
Remember and practise it with joy!
(pp. 501–502)
Upon Mount Bonbo, Milarepa instructed many Repas who
were preparing to depart for meditation in distant
hermitages. Those junior Repas who wanted to stay with
the Jetsun then said to him, “We are now in an age of
defilement. For the sake of inferior and slow-witted persons
like us, please preach something appropriate to our needs.”
In response, Milarepa sang:
Hearken further, my Son-disciples!
--- PAGE 108 ---
At this time of defilement
That shadows the Dharma of Sakyamuni,
One should strive with perseverance,
And carve upon one’s mind-stone
The word, “Diligence.”
When you feel sleepy during Meditation, try
To pray [55] hard with your awakened body,
mouth and mind.
When the fire-spark of Wisdom dims, try
To inflame it with the wind of Mindfulness.
If you want to be freed from saṃsāra’s prison,
Practise hard without diversion.
If to Nirvana you aspire,
Abandon then this world.
If from the depths of your heart
You want to practise Dharma,
Listen to my words and follow in my footsteps.
If you want to consummate the (Supreme)
Accomplishment,
Never forget that death will come.
If hard and long you meditate, all Buddhas
In the past, the present and the future
Will be well-pleased.
If you are ever straight-forward and upright in the
Dharma,
You will receive the grace of your Guru.
If without error you understand these words,
You can be sure that more happiness
--- PAGE 109 ---
And joy will come your way,
For such is my experience.
(pp. 547–548)
Some devas invited Milarepa to preach the Dharma in
Heaven but he cautioned them saying, “You must know
that Heaven is far from dependable; it is not eternal, and
one should not rely on it. To be born in heaven is not
necessarily a wonderful thing.” The Devas of Heaven said,
“In ignorant beings like us, the Kilesas always follow the
mind. Pray give us a teaching with which we can correct
this fault, so that we may depend upon it and practise it
frequently.” In response to their request, Milarepa sang:
Should you, oh faithful lady Devas,
intend to practise the Dharma often,
Inwardly you should practise concentration
and contemplation.
The renunciation of external affairs is your
adornment.
Oh, bear in mind this remedy for external
involvement!
With self-composure and mindfulness,
you should remain serene.
--- PAGE 110 ---
Glory is the equanimity of your mind and speech!
Glory is the resignation from many actions!
Should you meet disagreeable conditions,
Disturbing to your mind,
Keep watch upon yourself and be alert;
Keep warning yourself:
”The danger of anger is on its way.”
When you meet with enticing wealth,
Keep watch upon yourself and be alert,
Keep a check upon yourself
”The danger of craving is on its way.”
Should hurtful, insulting words come to your ears,
Keep watch upon yourself and be alert,
And so remind yourself:
”Hurtful sounds are but delusions of the ear.”
When you associate with your friends,
Watch carefully and warn yourself
”Let not jealousy in my heart arise!”
When you are plied with services and offerings.
Be alert and warn yourself:
”Let me beware lest pride should spring up in my
heart!”
At all times, in every way, keep watch upon
yourself.
At all times try to conquer evil thoughts within
you!
--- PAGE 111 ---
Whatever you may meet in your daily doings,
You should contemplate its void and illusory
nature.
Were even one hundred saints and scholars
gathered here,
More than this they could not say.
May you all be happy and prosperous!
May you all, with joyful hearts,
Devote yourselves to the practice of the Dharma!
(pp. 92–93)
A young shepherd by the name of Sanje Jhap, who was
sixteen years old, became interested in knowing what his
mind really was. Milarepa tested his ability by instructing
him to go for Refuge to the Three Precious Ones and then to
visualize a Buddha-image in front of his nose. The boy was
not seen for seven days and his father feared that he was
dead. They found him in a clay pit sitting upright and asked
him why he had not returned home for seven days. The boy
said that they must be joking for he had only been there a
short time—but it was seven days. While giving him
instructions Milarepa sang to him about his mind:
Listen to me, dear shepherd, the protector (of
--- PAGE 112 ---
sheep)!
By merely hearing of the taste of sugar,
Sweetness cannot be experienced;
Though one’s mind may understand
What sweetness is,
It cannot experience it directly,
Only the tongue can know it.
In the same way, one cannot see in full the nature
of mind,
Though he may have a glimpse of it
If it has been pointed out by others [56]
If one relies not on this one glimpse,
But continues searching for the nature of mind,
He will see it fully in the end.
Dear shepherd, in this way you should observe
your mind.
(pp. 123–124)
Listen to me, young shepherd!
The body is between the conscious and
unconscious state,
While the mind is the crucial and decisive factor!
--- PAGE 113 ---
He who feels sufferings in the Lower Realms,
Is the prisoner of saṃsāra,
Yet it is the mind that can free you from saṃsāra.
Surely you want to reach the other shore?
Surely you long for the City of Well-being and
Liberation?
If you desire to go, dear child,
I can show the Way to you
And give you the instructions.
(pp. 124–125)
Upon Rechungpa’s return from India, with books on logic
incantations from outsiders and much pride, as well as
genuine meditation instructions, Milarepa decided to rescue
him from this evil and so to welcome him, he sang:
I am a yogi who lives on the snow mountain peak,
With a healthy body I glorify the Mandala of the
Whole.[57]
Cleansed of vanity from the Five Poisons,
I am not unhappy;
I feel nought but joy!
Renouncing all turmoil
And fondness for diversion,
--- PAGE 114 ---
I reside alone in perfect ease.
Forswearing the bustle of this world,
Joyfully I stay in no-man’s land.
Since I have left embittered family life,
I no longer have to earn and save;
Since I want no books,
I do not intend to be a learned man;
Since I practise virtuous deeds,
I feel no shame of heart.
Since I have no pride or vanity,
I renounce with joy the saliva-splashing debate!
Hypocrisy I have not, nor pretension.
Happy and natural I live
Without forethought or adjustment.
Since I want no fame nor glory,
Rumours and accusations disappear.
Where’er I go, I feel happy,
Whate’er I wear, I feel joyful,
Whatever food I eat, I am satisfied.
I am always happy.
Through Marpa’s grace,
I, your old father, Milarepa,
Have realized saṃsāra and Nirvana.
The Yoga of joy ever fills my hermitage.
Your Repa brothers are well;
On hills remote they make progress in their
meditations.
Oh, my son Rechung Dorje Draugpa,
--- PAGE 115 ---
Have you returned from India?
Did you feel tired and weary on the journey?
Has your mind been sharpened and refreshed?
Has your voice been good for singing?
Did you practise and follow your Guru’s
instructions?
Did you secure the teachings that you wanted?
Did you obtain all the various instructions?
Have you gained much knowledge and much
learning?
Have you noticed your pride and egotism?
Are you altruistic in your thoughts and actions?
This is my song of welcoming for you,
On your return.
(pp. 422–423)
Five young nuns from Mon had become Milarepa’s
disciples. Having dwelt with him for some time, they
decided to invite him to their village (whence they thought
of returning). They said to him: Revered One, since your
mind no longer changes, there is no need for you to practise
meditation. Therefore, for the sake of sentient beings please
come to our village and preach the Dharma for us.”
--- PAGE 116 ---
Milarepa replied, “Practising meditation in solitude is, in
itself, a service to the people. Although my mind no longer
changes, it is still a good tradition for a great yogi to remain
in solitude.” He then sang:
Through the practice (of meditation)
I show gratitude to my Guru.
Pray grant me your grace, ripen and liberate me.
You gifted disciples, followers of Dharma,
Heed carefully, with all attention,
While I sing of the profound Essential Teaching.
The Great Lioness of the upper snow mountain
Poses proudly on the summit of the peak;
She is not afraid—
Proudly dwelling on the mountain
Is the snow lion’s way.
The Queen Vulture on Red Rock
Stretches her wings in the wide sky,
She is not afraid of falling—
Flying through the sky is the vulture’s way.
In the depths of the great ocean
Darts the Queen of Fish, glittering;
She is not afraid (of drowning)—
Swimming is the fish’s way.
On the branches of the oak trees,
Agile monkeys swing and leap,
They are not afraid of falling—
--- PAGE 117 ---
Such is the wild monkey’s way.
Under the leafy canopy of the dense wood,
The striped tiger roams and swiftly runs,
Not because of fear or worry—
This shows her haughty pride,
And is the mighty tiger’s way.
In the wood on Singa Mountain,
I, Milarepa, meditate on voidness,
Not because I fear to lose my understanding—
Constant meditation is the yogi’s way.
…
Those great yogis who have mastered the Practice
Never desire anything in this world.
It is not because they want fame
That they remain in solitude;
It is the natural sign springing from their hearts—
The true feeling of non-attachment and
renunciation.
Yogis who practise the teaching of the Path
Profound,
Dwell always in caves and on mountains,
Not that they are cynical or pompous,
But to concentrate on meditation is their selfwilling.
I, the cotton-clad, have sung many songs,
Not to amuse myself by singing sophistries,
But for your sake, faithful followers who assemble
--- PAGE 118 ---
here,
From my heart I have spoken words helpful and
profound.
(pp. 81–83 extract)
A monk-disciple of Milarepa, Ligor Sharu, wanted the
Jetsun to adapt himself somewhat to worldly conventions,
so as to win the interest and following of great scholars.
Milarepa refused this idea saying that he would ever follow
his Guru’s instructions to live remotely, and he sang to
Ligor Sharu:
I bow down to Marpa, the Translator.
Realizing that fame is as unreal as an echo,
I abandon not the ascetic way of life,
Throwing away all cares and preparations.
Whatever reputation I may have,
I shall always be happy and contented.
Realizing that all things are illusion,
I cast away possessions;
For wealth obtained by strife I have not the least
desire!
Whatever my means and prestige,
--- PAGE 119 ---
I shall always be happy and contented.
Realizing that all followers are phantoms,
I have no concern for human relationship
And travel where I please,
Unlike those artificial scholar-priests
Who act with discretion and restraint. [58]
Whatever the status I may have
I shall always be happy and contented.
Realizing that desires and sufferings
Are themselves the Great Equality, [59]
I cut the rope of passion and of hatred.
With or without associates,
I shall always be happy and contented.
The nature of being is beyond play-words; [60]
Attachments to any doctrine or concept
Is merely a matter of self-confusion.
Unshackling the fetter of the knower-and-theknown,
Whatever I become and wherever I remain,
I shall always be happy and contented.
In the great Illuminating Mind itself,
I see no pollution by wandering thoughts.
Throwing away all reasonings and observations,
Whatever words I hear and say,
I shall always be happy and contented.
(pp. 517–518)
--- PAGE 120 ---
Rechungpa first went to India to be cured of leprosy, and
before he went he sealed up with clay the mouth of the cave
where the Jetsun was meditating. When he returned having
been cured, people said that the yogi Mila had not been seen
for some time. Rechungpa went to the cave and broke down
the wall, which was still intact. Milarepa was still in
meditation and then sang to him as a greeting:
I bow down at the feet of Marpa, the Gracious One.
Because I have left my kinsmen, I am happy;
Because I have abandoned attachment to my
country,
I am happy;
Since I disregard this place,
I am happy;
As I do not wear the lofty garb of priesthood, [61]
I am happy;
Because I cling not to house and family, I am
happy;
I need not this or that, so I am happy.
Because I possess the great wealth of Dharma, I am
happy;
Because I worry not about property, I am happy;
Because I have no fear of losing anything, I am
happy;
--- PAGE 121 ---
Since I never dread exhaustion, I am happy;
Having fully realized Mind-Essence, [62] I am
happy;
As I need not force myself to please my patrons,
I am happy;
Having no fatigue or weariness, I am happy;
As I need prepare for nothing, I am happy;
Since all I do complies with Dharma, I am happy;
Never desiring to move, I am happy;
As the thought of death brings me no fear, I am
happy;
Bandits, thieves and robbers never molest me,
So at all times I am happy!
Having won the best conditions for Dharmapractice,
I am happy;
Having ceased from evil deeds and left off sinning,
I am happy;
Treading the Path of Merits, I am happy;
Divorced from hate and injury, I am happy,
Having lost all pride and jealousy, I am happy;
Understanding the wrongness of the Eight Worldly
Winds, [63]
I am happy;
Absorbed in quiet and even-mindedness, I am
happy
Using the mind to watch the mind, I am happy;
Without hope or fear, I am happy
--- PAGE 122 ---
In the sphere of Non-clinging Illuminations
I am happy;
The Non-distinguishing Wisdom of Dhammadhātu
[64]
is itself happy;
Poised in the natural realm of Immanence [65]
I am happy;
In letting the Six Groups of Consciousness go by
To return to their original nature, [66] I am happy;
The five radiant gates of sense all make one happy;
To stop the mind that comes and goes is happy,
Oh, I have so much of happiness and joy!
This is a song of gaiety I sing,
This is a song of gratitude to my Guru and the
Three Precious Ones—
I want no other happiness.
Through the grace of Buddha and the Gurus,
Food and clothes are provided by my patrons.
With no bad deeds and sins,
I shall be joyful when I die;
With all good deeds and virtues,
I am happy while alive.
Enjoying yoga, I am indeed most happy.
But how are you, Rechungpa?
Is your wish fulfilled?
(pp. 110–112)
--- PAGE 123 ---
The envoy of the Nepali King, upon meeting him for the
first time, was wonderstruck at Milarepa’s lack of material
possessions and asked him: “Don’t you find it hard to live
thus without taking nourishing food? Why is it necessary to
abandon all belongings?” Milarepa then answered the
envoy: “I am the Tibetan yogi, Milarepa. ’Without
belongings’ means ’without sufferings’.” Now listen to my
song:
I bow down to all holy Gurus.
I am the man called Milarepa.
For possessions I have no desire.
Since I never strive to make money,
First I do not suffer
Because of making it;
Then I do not suffer
Because of keeping it;
In the end I do not suffer
Because of hoarding it.
Better far and happier is it
Not to have possessions.
Without attachment to kinsmen and companions,
I do not seek affection in companionship,
First I do not suffer
Because of heart-clinging;
--- PAGE 124 ---
Then I do not suffer
From any quarrelling;
In the end I do not suffer
Because of separation.
It is far better to have no affectionate companions.
Since I have no pride and egotism,
I do not look for fame and glory.
First I do not suffer
Because of seeking them;
Then I do not suffer
In trying to preserve them;
In the end I do not suffer
For fear of losing them.
It is far better to have neither fame nor glory.
Since I have no desire for any place,
I crave not to be here, nor there.
First I do not worry
About my home’s protection,
Then I do not suffer
From a fervent passion for it;
In the end I am not anxious to defend it.
It is far better to have neither home nor land.
(pp. 288–289)
124

--- PAGE 125 ---
This is the song of Milarepa to some patrons from Drin who
were ashamed because of the Jetsun’s lack of conventional
behaviour:
Through wandering long in many places,
I have forgotten my native land.
Staying long with my Holy Jetsun,
I have forgotten all my kinsmen.
Keeping for long the Buddha’s Teaching,
I have forgotten worldly things.
Staying for long in hermitages,
I have forgotten all diversions.
Through long watching of monkeys’ play,
I have forgotten sheep and cattle.
Long accustomed to a tinder-box,
I have forgotten all household chores.
Long used to solitude without servant or master,
I have forgotten courteous manners.
Long accustomed to be carefree,
I have forgotten worldly shame.
Long accustomed to the mind coming and going
By itself, I have forgotten how to hide things.
Long used to burning Duma-heat, [67]
I have forgotten clothing.
Long accustomed to practising Non-discriminating
Wisdom,
I have forgotten all distracting thoughts.
Long used to practising the Two-in-One
Illumination, [68]
--- PAGE 126 ---
I have forgotten all nonsensical ideas.
These twelve ’oblivions’ are the teachings of this
yogi.
Why, dear patrons, do you not also follow them?
I have untied the knot of dualism;
What need have I to follow your customs.
To me, Bodhi is spontaneity itself!
The Dharma of you worldly people
Is too difficult to practise.
Caring for nought, I live the way I please.
Your so-called ’shame’ only brings deceit
And fraud; How to pretend I know not.
(pp. 579–580)
In a gathering of patrons, a young man said to Milarepa:
“We would like to come to you for instructions; please tell
us where your temple is and who provides your
sustenance.” In answer Milarepa sang:
My temple is an unnamed hermitage,
My patrons are men and women everywhere,
No one can tell where I go or stay.
In the caves where no man comes
I, the yogi, am lost to view.
--- PAGE 127 ---
(When I travel) I carry
Only my Guru’s Instructions—lighter
Than feathers, I shoulder them with ease;
More handy than gold, I conceal them where I
please,
Stronger than a solid castle,
In all perils they stand firm.
In the three winters I dwell happily in forests;
In the three summers I stay cheerfully on snow
mountains;
In the three springs I live with pleasure in the
marshes;
In the three autumns I wander joyfully for alms.
In the teaching of my Guru, my mind is always
happy;
Singing songs of inspiration, my mouth is always
happy,
Wearing cotton from Nepal, my body’s always
happy.
In delight I accomplish all and everything—
To me there is but cheer and joy.
(pp. 537–538)
127

--- PAGE 128 ---
The patrons of Nya Non wished Milarepa to stay with them
permanently. Milarepa replied, “I cannot stay here long, but
I will bestow the blessing of long life and good health upon
all of you. Also I will make a wish that we meet again under
auspicious circumstances conducive to the Dharma.” Then
he sang:
In the immense blue sky above
Roll on the sun and moon.
Their courses mark the change of time.
Blue sky, I wish you health and fortune,
For I, the moon-and-sun, am leaving
To visit the Four Continents for pleasure.
On the mountain peak is a great rock
’Round which circles oft the vulture,
The King of birds.
Their meeting
And their parting mark the change of time.
Dear rock, be well and healthy, for I,
The vulture, now will fly away
Into the vast space for pleasure.
May lightnings never strike you,
May I not be caught by snares.
Inspired by the Dharma,
May we soon meet again,
In prosperity and boon.
Below in the Tsang River,
Swim fish with golden eyes;
--- PAGE 129 ---
Their meeting and their parting
Mark the change of time.
Dear stream, be well and healthy, for I,
The fish, am going to the Ganges for diversion.
May irrigators never drain you,
May fishermen ne’er net me
Inspired by the Dharma,
May we soon meet again
In prosperity and boon.
In the fair garden blooms the flower, Halo;
Circling round it is the Persian bee.
Their meeting and their parting,
Mark the change of time.
Dear flower, be well and healthy, for I
Will see the Ganges’ blooms for pleasure.
May hail not beat down upon you,
May winds blow me not away.
Inspired by the Dharma,
May we soon meet again
In prosperity and boon.
Circling round the Yogi Milarepa
Are the faithful patrons from Nya Non;
Their meeting and their parting
Mark the change of time.
Be well and healthy, dear patrons, as I
Leave for the far mountains for diversion.
May I, the yogi, make good progress,
And you, my patrons, all live long.
--- PAGE 130 ---
Inspired by the Dharma,
May we soon meet again
In prosperity and boon!
(pp. 602–604)
--- PAGE 131 ---
Notes
1. See Tibet’s Great Yogi, Milarepa, translated by Lama Kazi
Dawo-Samdup, edited by Evans-Wentz, published by
Oxford University Press.
2. The complete work, from which all the songs
reproduced below are extracted, is the Hundred Thousand
Songs of Milarepa, first translated from Tibetan into
English by Prof. C. C. Chang, in two volumes, published
by the University Books Inc, New Hyde Park, New York.
3. Lama = ācariya or teacher. It is not the Tibetan equivalent
of ’bhikkhu’ (which is ’gelong’). Thus in Tibet not all
bhikkhus are Lamas.
4. “Three different arts of black magic”. Notes in
parentheses are quoted from the translation of the
Hundred Thousand Songs.
5. In English, we have his Jewel Ornament of Liberation,
translated by H.V. Guenther, London, 1959.
6. Translated by Buddharakkhita Thera of Bangalore, India.
7. The Bodhisatta’s Vow and Practice to save all sentient
beings either in Mundane respect when Voidness has not
been realized, or as Transcendental when Suññata has
--- PAGE 132 ---
been experienced. His practice includes the Perfections, or
those qualities which help one in “crossing over” from
saṃsāra to Nibbāna—the Pārami(tā).
8. Or Three Realms—of Desire, of Form and of Non-Form.
“They include all sentient beings in the various Realms of
Saṃsāric existence.”
9. The realm of repeated birth-and-deaths brought into
experience by the mistaken conceptions of ’I’, ’self’, ’ego’,
and ’soul’ as abiding entities.
10. Used throughout to express the Buddhist teaching of
deeds which bring harm on others (and ruin to oneself).
This action is ’unskilful’ (akusala) and ’sin’ here must be
understood in thus sense.
11. Delusion; illusory nature of saṃsāra.
12. Virtuous deeds that lead one to Enlightenment.
13. The intermediate state of existence between death and
rebirth (Skt: antarābhava, sambhavesi), but its existence is
disputed in Theravāda, where rebirth is said to be
immediate. The question is complicated by the fact that
Time is a relative concept (paññatti) and its perception
dependent upon the possession of certain senses. Bardo,
according to Tibetan Buddhism, is a very important state,
like crossroads, and the fate and fortune of one’s rebirth
depends much upon it.
14. The Lord of Hell before whom, according to some
accounts, evil-doers are dragged and tried. Such visions
--- PAGE 133 ---
seen by one arising in the Hells are often explained as
mental projections appearing very real to those who see
them. They are, of course, the fruit (phala, vipāka) of
unskilful action (akusala kamma).
15. Of birth, old age, sickness and death.
16. A legendary yak ox said to dwell in Heaven.
17. Gained by the practice of the four arūpa jhānas: infinity
of space, of consciousness, no-thingness, and neitherperception-nor-non- perception.
18. Gained by the practice of the four rūpa jhānas.
19. Of Titans (asura), Hungry Ghosts (peta), Animals, and
Hell-wraiths.
20. This is the true nature of mind (citta-sabhāva) which is
anattā, suñña, etc., but is not recognized due to holding
ideas of permanence, happiness, ego, etc.
21. The reason why a personality endowed with all the six
elements (earth, water, fire, air, space and consciousness)
can commit all good and evil deeds is implicitly given in
the Abhidharmakoṣa. Sentient beings in the rūpa- and arūparealms are not endowed with all six elements, some of
them having only two elements or one, thus being
incapable of the commission of great evil deeds such as
killing, sexual perversion, etc. This is why it is often said
that here in this world is the best place either to attain
Nirvana or to fall into Realms of Woe, since human
beings are endowed with great mental and physical
--- PAGE 134 ---
powers partly dependent on the possession of the Six
Elements.
22. As for instance, did Lord Buddha to Nanda when
leading him to practise the true Dhamma, by first
promising him rewards of exquisite pleasures in the
heavens of desire.
23. It is said that the denizens of this hell suffer unceasing
torment, whereas in other hells, temporary relief of pain is
possible. Those who now afflict the Dharma in Tibet
should take notice of the inevitable fate in store for
persecutors of the Dharma!
24. See note 9.
25. All beings have been one’s parents at some time or
other; see note 40.
26. In Pāli, arati = accidie, spiritual boredom, indifference to
what is spiritually skilful.
27. Man is not free to choose where he will be reborn, this
being a process depending upon what Karma he has
made for himself.
28. The ’Store’ Consciousness, the function of which is to
preserve the ’seeds’ of mental impressions. Memory and
learning are made possible because of this consciousness.
29. There is a realm, O bhikkhus,… (where) there is no
coming or going or remaining, or deceasing or arising…
thus is the end of suffering.” (Udāna 80–81)
--- PAGE 135 ---
30. See note 9.
31. According to Tibetan pathology, these are the three
major sicknesses of man.
32. See note 9.
33. Channels of spiritual force in the body.
34. The ancient, pre-Buddhist religion of Tibet.
35. It is Tibetan custom to fold the body at the waist and
make it into a bundle to be borne away.
36. See note 3.
37. For these seven Possessions of a Righteous Emperor,
see Mahāsudassana Sutta, Dīgha Nikāya.
38. Spiritual provisions for Buddhahood: ñāṇa-sambhara
(paññā-pāramī) = Provision of Wisdom; puñña-sambhāra
(the other pāramī) = Provision of Merits accumulated by
way of Compassion.
39. Antithesis of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying,
backbiting, harsh speech, nonsensical talk, covetousness,
anger and perverted views.
40. All sentient beings may be regarded as one’s mothers
since as Lord Buddha says: “I see no beginning to beings
who, blinded by ignorance and impelled by craving are
hurrying through the round of birth.” In this way, we
have a relationship with all living creatures as they have
all been our mothers.
--- PAGE 136 ---
41. Or Whispered Transmission: the Ghagvupa School of
Buddhist Practice—See Introduction.
42. Or “Perfections” (see also note 53). In Northern
Buddhist tradition these are six (Giving, Moral Conduct,
Patience, Diligence, Meditation, Wisdom) with another
four added occasionally. Apart from Meditation the other
five are counted among the Perfections in Theravāda,
which lists ten. Two of these are of Loving-kindness and
Equanimity, which would of course fall under
Meditation.
43. See note 53.
44. See note 63.
45. Offerings made to the Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and
deities.
46. Instructions for the practice of meditation.
47. A Buddhist bhikkhu or yogi is meant here.
48. As with the other couplets, when one can “feed on the
Instructions”, has “mastered the Awareness within” etc.,
one will naturally not be involved in evil and unskilful
acts.
49. See notes 42 and 53.
50. Mahāyāna here need not be understood in any sectarian
sense but means rather the Buddha’s Great Way of
Wisdom-Compassion, transcending narrow sectarian
dogmatism. In contrast to the latter, the Jetsun taught
--- PAGE 137 ---
essentially a Way of Practice and Realization.
51. Klesa, kilesa = Defilement; poison of mind, such as lust,
hatred and delusion.
52. Freedom from “all thoughts and conceptualizations, be
they simple or complex, good or evil, monistic or
dualistic… then one is said to have acquired the wisdom
of Equality or Non-discrimination.”
53. Sometimes translated ’perfections’ but in Chinese and
Tibetan as “Reaching-the-other-shore,” meaning reaching
“Nirvāna beyond saṃsāra”.
54. See Khantivādi Jātaka—No. 313.
55. Using body, mouth and mind in some devotional
exercise, such as the ’Long Prostrations’ so often and
vigorously practised by Tibetans.
56. Sudden insight experienced through the action of the
Teacher, either verbally or physically—many well-known
cases in Zen Buddhism.
57. It is significant that the words ’holy’ and ’whole’ are
etymologically related.
58. ’Artificial’ because their scholarship was combined only
with a morality of restrictions, thus lacking the essential
practice of Dharma.
59. Unenlightened worldly beings discriminate between
likes and dislikes, etc., but with Transcendent wisdom
(paññā) this is seen to be a false process, for where there is
--- PAGE 138 ---
no discrimination, there is no desire or suffering.
60. Words are learnt, concepts are formed, and through
confusion with them one assumes that even ultimate
Truth can be expressed by words; but Nibbāna is beyond
such ’play-words’.
61. The allusion is to the Sangha’s degeneracy in Mila’s
days and to the pride in scholarship which strangled
Dhamma practice.
62. Mind-essence is the true nature of mind (see note 20).
63. Gain, loss, praise, blame, honour, ridicule, joy, sorrow.
3, 4 and 5 are three different aspects or descriptions of
Enlightenment.
64. They are three different aspects or descriptions of
Enlightenment.
65. They are three different aspects or descriptions of
Enlightenment.
66. Realizing their nature to be void (suñña).
67. A heat produced in the body by means of meditation,
thus enabling a yogi to live high in the snow mountains.
Milarepa wore only one piece of cotton cloth.
68. Non-distinction between means (the first five pāramī)
and wisdom (the sixth one)
--- PAGE 139 ---
THE BUDDHIST PUBLICATION SOCIETY
The BPS is an approved charity dedicated to making known
the Teaching of the Buddha, which has a vital message for
all people.
Founded in 1958, the BPS has published a wide variety of
books and booklets covering a great range of topics.
Its publications include accurate annotated translations of
the Buddha’s discourses, standard reference works, as well
as original contemporary expositions of Buddhist thought
and practice. These works present Buddhism as it truly is—
a dynamic force which has influenced receptive minds for
the past 2500 years and is still as relevant today as it was
when it first arose.
For more information about the BPS and our publications,
please visit our website, or write an e-mail or a letter to the:
Administrative Secretary
Buddhist Publication Society
P.O. Box 61
 
54 Sangharaja Mawatha
Kandy • Sri Lanka
E-mail: bps@bps.lk
--- PAGE 140 ---
web site: http://www.bps.lk
Tel: 0094 81 223 7283 • Fax: 0094 81 222 3679
--- PAGE 141 ---
Table of Contents
Title page
Sixty Songs of Milarepa
Introduction
Complimentary Song to the Deities of Red Rock Jewel
Valley
The Eight Reminders
The Six Resolutions
The Ocean of Saṃsāra
The Song of Transience with Eight Similes
The Fleeting Bubbles
The Song of Transiency and Delusion
The Four Renunciations
A Song with Nine Meanings
The Song of the Seven Truths
Notes
141